


These promises are fair, the parties sure,

And our induction full of prosperous hope.

Peace, cousin Percy. You will make him mad.

Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.

The Archdeacon hath divided it

Into three limits very equally:

England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,

By south and east is to my part assigned;

All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,

And all the fertile land within that bound

To Owen Glendower; and, dear coz, to you

The remnant northward lying off from Trent.

And our indentures tripartite are drawn,

Which being sealèd interchangeably—

A business that this night may execute—

Tomorrow, cousin Percy, you and I

And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth

To meet your father and the Scottish power,

As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.

My father Glendower is not ready yet,

Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.

Within that space you may have drawn together

Your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.

Yea, but mark how he bears his course, and runs me up

With like advantage on the other side,

Gelding the opposèd continent as much

As on the other side it takes from you.

Fie, cousin Percy, how you cross my father!

In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,

Exceedingly well read and profited

In strange concealments, valiant as a lion,

And wondrous affable, and as bountiful

As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?

He holds your temper in a high respect

And curbs himself even of his natural scope

When you come cross his humor. Faith, he does.

I warrant you that man is not alive

Might so have tempted him as you have done

Without the taste of danger and reproof.

But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.

This is the deadly spite that angers me:

My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.

Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy

Shall follow in your conduct speedily.

I understand thy looks. That pretty Welsh

Which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens

I am too perfect in, and but for shame

In such a parley should I answer thee.

I understand thy kisses, and thou mine,

And that’s a feeling disputation;

But I will never be a truant, love,

Till I have learned thy language; for thy tongue

Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penned,

Sung by a fair queen in a summer’s bower,

With ravishing division, to her lute.

O, I am ignorance itself in this!

With all my heart I’ll sit and hear her sing.

By that time will our book, I think, be drawn.

With all my heart.

