


Good morrow, carriers. What’s o’clock?

I prithee, lend me thy lantern to see my

gelding in the stable.

I pray thee, lend me

thine.

Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to

come to London?

What ho, chamberlain!

That’s even as fair as “at hand, quoth the

Chamberlain,” for thou variest no more from

picking of purses than giving direction doth from

laboring: thou layest the plot how.

Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas’

clerks, I’ll give thee this neck.

What talkest thou to me of the hangman? If

I hang, I’ll make a fat pair of gallows, for if I hang,

old Sir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is

no starveling. Tut, there are other Troyans that

thou dream’st not of, the which for sport sake are

content to do the profession some grace, that

would, if matters should be looked into, for their

own credit sake make all whole. I am joined with no

foot-land-rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers,

none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms,

but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters

and great oneyers, such as can hold in, such

as will strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner

than drink, and drink sooner than pray, and yet,

zounds, I lie, for they pray continually to their saint

the commonwealth, or rather not pray to her but

prey on her, for they ride up and down on her and

make her their boots.

She will, she will. Justice hath liquored her.

We steal as in a castle, cocksure. We have the

receipt of fern seed; we walk invisible.

Give me thy hand. Thou shalt have a share in

our purchase, as I am a true man.

Go to. Homo is a common name to all men.

Bid the ostler bring my gelding out of the stable.

Farewell, you muddy knave.

Stand.

Case you, case you. On with your vizards.

There’s money of the King’s coming down the hill.

’Tis going to the King’s Exchequer.

There’s enough to make us all.

Some eight or ten.

Stand!

