


Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?

Dare no man answer in a case of truth?

Then say at once if I maintained the truth,

Or else was wrangling Somerset in th’ error?

Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance!

The truth appears so naked on my side

That any purblind eye may find it out.

Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,

In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts:

Let him that is a trueborn gentleman

And stands upon the honor of his birth,

If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,

From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.

And I.

Now, Somerset, where is your argument?

Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses,

For pale they look with fear, as witnessing

The truth on our side.

Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?

Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth,

Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.

Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,

I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.

Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.

He bears him on the place’s privilege,

Or durst not for his craven heart say thus.

My father was attachèd, not attainted,

Condemned to die for treason, but no traitor;

And that I’ll prove on better men than Somerset,

Were growing time once ripened to my will.

For your partaker Pole and you yourself,

I’ll note you in my book of memory

To scourge you for this apprehension.

Look to it well, and say you are well warned.

And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,

As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,

Will I forever, and my faction, wear

Until it wither with me to my grave

Or flourish to the height of my degree.

How I am braved, and must perforce endure it!

Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,

That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.

Thanks, gentle sir.

Come, let us four to dinner. I dare say

This quarrel will drink blood another day.

Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,

Your nephew, late despisèd Richard, comes.

First, lean thine agèd back against mine arm,

And in that ease I’ll tell thee my disease.

This day, in argument upon a case,

Some words there grew ’twixt Somerset and me,

Among which terms he used his lavish tongue

And did upbraid me with my father’s death;

Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,

Else with the like I had requited him.

Therefore, good uncle, for my father’s sake,

In honor of a true Plantagenet,

And for alliance’ sake, declare the cause

My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.

Discover more at large what cause that was,

For I am ignorant and cannot guess.

Of which, my lord, your Honor is the last.

Thy grave admonishments prevail with me.

But yet methinks my father’s execution

Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.

O uncle, would some part of my young years

Might but redeem the passage of your age.

And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul.

In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage,

And like a hermit overpassed thy days.—

Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast,

And what I do imagine, let that rest.—

Keepers, convey him hence, and I myself

Will see his burial better than his life.

Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,

Choked with ambition of the meaner sort.

And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,

Which Somerset hath offered to my house,

I doubt not but with honor to redress.

And therefore haste I to the Parliament,

Either to be restorèd to my blood,

Or make mine ill th’ advantage of my good.

Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue,

Lest it be said “Speak, sirrah, when you should;

Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?”

Else would I have a fling at Winchester.

Thy humble servant vows obedience

And humble service till the point of death.

And so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!

And as my duty springs, so perish they

That grudge one thought against your Majesty.

This is my servant; hear him, noble prince.

Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?

Let this dissension first be tried by fight,

And then your Highness shall command a peace.

There is my pledge; accept it, Somerset.

And so he did, but yet I like it not

In that he wears the badge of Somerset.

And if iwis he did—but let it rest.

Other affairs must now be managèd.

Are not the speedy scouts returned again

That dogged the mighty army of the Dauphin?

A plague upon that villain Somerset

That thus delays my promisèd supply

Of horsemen that were levied for this siege!

Renownèd Talbot doth expect my aid,

And I am louted by a traitor villain

And cannot help the noble chevalier.

God comfort him in this necessity.

If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.

O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart

Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot’s place!

So should we save a valiant gentleman

By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.

Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep

That thus we die while remiss traitors sleep.

He dies, we lose; I break my warlike word;

We mourn, France smiles; we lose, they daily get,

All long of this vile traitor Somerset.

Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have

To bid his young son welcome to his grave?

Away! Vexation almost stops my breath,

That sundered friends greet in the hour of death.

Lucy, farewell. No more my fortune can

But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.

Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours are won away,

Long all of Somerset and his delay.

Damsel of France, I think I have you fast.

Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms,

And try if they can gain your liberty.

A goodly prize, fit for the devil’s grace!

See how the ugly witch doth bend her brows

As if with Circe she would change my shape.

O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man;

No shape but his can please your dainty eye.

Fell banning hag! Enchantress, hold thy tongue.

Curse, miscreant, when thou com’st to the stake.

Bring forth that sorceress condemned to burn.

This argues what her kind of life hath been,

Wicked and vile; and so her death concludes.

Take her away, for she hath lived too long

To fill the world with vicious qualities.

Ay, ay.—Away with her to execution.

Now heaven forfend, the holy maid with child?

She and the Dauphin have been juggling.

I did imagine what would be her refuge.

Alanson, that notorious Machiavel?

It dies an if it had a thousand lives!

Why, here’s a girl! I think she knows not well—

There were so many—whom she may accuse.

And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure!—

Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee.

Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.

Break thou in pieces, and consume to ashes,

Thou foul accursèd minister of hell!

Is all our travail turned to this effect?

After the slaughter of so many peers,

So many captains, gentlemen, and soldiers

That in this quarrel have been overthrown

And sold their bodies for their country’s benefit,

Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?

Have we not lost most part of all the towns—

By treason, falsehood, and by treachery—

Our great progenitors had conquerèd?

O, Warwick, Warwick, I foresee with grief

The utter loss of all the realm of France!

Speak, Winchester, for boiling choler chokes

The hollow passage of my poisoned voice

By sight of these our baleful enemies.

Insulting Charles, hast thou by secret means

Used intercession to obtain a league

And, now the matter grows to compromise,

Stand’st thou aloof upon comparison?

Either accept the title thou usurp’st,

Of benefit proceeding from our king

And not of any challenge of desert,

Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.

Then swear allegiance to his Majesty,

As thou art knight, never to disobey

Nor be rebellious to the crown of England,

Thou nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.

So, now dismiss your army when you please;

Hang up your ensigns, let your drums be still,

For here we entertain a solemn peace.

