


Reignier, is ’t thou that thinkest to beguile me?

Where is the Dauphin?—Come, come from behind.

I know thee well, though never seen before.

Be not amazed; there’s nothing hid from me.

In private will I talk with thee apart.—

Stand back, you lords, and give us leave a while.

Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherd’s daughter,

My wit untrained in any kind of art.

Heaven and Our Lady gracious hath it pleased

To shine on my contemptible estate.

Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs,

And to sun’s parching heat displayed my cheeks,

God’s Mother deignèd to appear to me,

And in a vision full of majesty

Willed me to leave my base vocation

And free my country from calamity.

Her aid she promised and assured success.

In complete glory she revealed herself;

And whereas I was black and swart before,

With those clear rays which she infused on me

That beauty am I blest with, which you may see.

Ask me what question thou canst possible,

And I will answer unpremeditated.

My courage try by combat, if thou dar’st,

And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.

Resolve on this: thou shalt be fortunate

If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.

I am prepared. Here is my keen-edged sword,

Decked with fine flower-de-luces on each side—

The which at Touraine, in Saint Katherine’s churchyard,

Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.

And while I live, I’ll ne’er fly from a man.

Christ’s mother helps me; else I were too weak.

I must not yield to any rights of love,

For my profession’s sacred from above.

When I have chasèd all thy foes from hence,

Then will I think upon a recompense.

Why, no, I say. Distrustful recreants,

Fight till the last gasp. I’ll be your guard.

Assigned am I to be the English scourge.

This night the siege assuredly I’ll raise.

Expect Saint Martin’s summer, halcyons’ days,

Since I have enterèd into these wars.

Glory is like a circle in the water,

Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself

Till by broad spreading it disperse to naught.

With Henry’s death, the English circle ends;

Dispersèd are the glories it included.

Now am I like that proud insulting ship

Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.

Come, come; ’tis only I that must disgrace thee.

Talbot, farewell. Thy hour is not yet come.

I must go victual Orleance forthwith.

O’ertake me if thou canst. I scorn thy strength.

Go, go, cheer up thy hunger-starvèd men.

Help Salisbury to make his testament.

This day is ours, as many more shall be.

Advance our waving colors on the walls.

Rescued is Orleance from the English.

Thus Joan la Pucelle hath performed her word.

Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend?

At all times will you have my power alike?

Sleeping or waking, must I still prevail,

Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?—

Improvident soldiers, had your watch been good,

This sudden mischief never could have fall’n.

Question, my lords, no further of the case,

How or which way; ’tis sure they found some place

But weakly guarded, where the breach was made.

And now there rests no other shift but this:

To gather our soldiers, scattered and dispersed,

And lay new platforms to endamage them.

These are the city gates, the gates of Roan,

Through which our policy must make a breach.

Take heed. Be wary how you place your words;

Talk like the vulgar sort of market men

That come to gather money for their corn.

If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,

And that we find the slothful watch but weak,

I’ll by a sign give notice to our friends,

That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.

Paysans la pauvre gens de France:

Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.

Now, Roan, I’ll shake thy bulwarks to the ground.

Behold, this is the happy wedding torch

That joineth Roan unto her countrymen,

But burning fatal to the Talbonites.

Good morrow, gallants. Want you corn for bread?

I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast

Before he’ll buy again at such a rate.

’Twas full of darnel. Do you like the taste?

What will you do, good graybeard? Break a lance

And run a-tilt at Death within a chair?

Are you so hot, sir? Yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace,

If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.

God speed the Parliament! Who shall be the Speaker?

Belike your Lordship takes us then for fools,

To try if that our own be ours or no.

Away, captains. Let’s get us from the walls,

For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.—

Goodbye, my lord. We came but to tell you

That we are here.

Dismay not, princes, at this accident,

Nor grieve that Roan is so recoverèd.

Care is no cure, but rather corrosive

For things that are not to be remedied.

Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while,

And like a peacock sweep along his tail;

We’ll pull his plumes and take away his train,

If dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.

Then thus it must be; this doth Joan devise:

By fair persuasions mixed with sugared words

We will entice the Duke of Burgundy

To leave the Talbot and to follow us.

Your honors shall perceive how I will work

To bring this matter to the wishèd end.

Hark! By the sound of drum you may perceive

Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.

There goes the Talbot with his colors spread,

And all the troops of English after him.

Now in the rearward comes the Duke and his.

Fortune in favor makes him lag behind.

Summon a parley; we will talk with him.

The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.

Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France,

Stay; let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.

Look on thy country, look on fertile France,

And see the cities and the towns defaced

By wasting ruin of the cruel foe.

As looks the mother on her lowly babe

When death doth close his tender-dying eyes,

See, see the pining malady of France:

Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,

Which thou thyself hast given her woeful breast.

O, turn thy edgèd sword another way;

Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help.

One drop of blood drawn from thy country’s bosom

Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore.

Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,

And wash away thy country’s stainèd spots.

Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,

Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.

Who join’st thou with but with a lordly nation

That will not trust thee but for profit’s sake?

When Talbot hath set footing once in France

And fashioned thee that instrument of ill,

Who then but English Henry will be lord,

And thou be thrust out like a fugitive?

Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof:

Was not the Duke of Orleance thy foe?

And was he not in England prisoner?

But when they heard he was thine enemy,

They set him free, without his ransom paid,

In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.

See then, thou fight’st against thy countrymen,

And join’st with them will be thy slaughtermen.

Come, come, return; return, thou wandering lord.

Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.

Done like a Frenchman: turn and turn again.

Once I encountered him, and thus I said:

“Thou maiden youth, be vanquished by a maid.”

But with a proud majestical high scorn

He answered thus: “Young Talbot was not born

To be the pillage of a giglot wench.”

So, rushing in the bowels of the French,

He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.

Here’s a silly stately style indeed.

The Turk, that two-and-fifty kingdoms hath,

Writes not so tedious a style as this.

Him that thou magnifi’st with all these titles

Stinking and flyblown lies here at our feet.

I think this upstart is old Talbot’s ghost,

He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.

For God’s sake, let him have him. To keep them here,

They would but stink and putrefy the air.

Peace be amongst them if they turn to us;

Else ruin combat with their palaces!

Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.

Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine;

Let Henry fret and all the world repine.

The Regent conquers and the Frenchmen fly.

Now help, you charming spells and periapts,

And you choice spirits that admonish me,

And give me signs of future accidents.

You speedy helpers, that are substitutes

Under the lordly monarch of the north,

Appear, and aid me in this enterprise.

This speed and quick appearance argues proof

Of your accustomed diligence to me.

Now, you familiar spirits that are culled

Out of the powerful regions under earth,

Help me this once, that France may get the field.

O, hold me not with silence overlong!

Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,

I’ll lop a member off and give it you

In earnest of a further benefit,

So you do condescend to help me now.

No hope to have redress? My body shall

Pay recompense if you will grant my suit.

Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice

Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?

Then take my soul—my body, soul, and all—

Before that England give the French the foil.

See, they forsake me. Now the time is come

That France must vail her lofty-plumèd crest

And let her head fall into England’s lap.

My ancient incantations are too weak,

And hell too strong for me to buckle with.

Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.

Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.

A plaguing mischief light on Charles and thee,

And may you both be suddenly surprised

By bloody hands in sleeping on your beds!

I prithee give me leave to curse awhile.

Decrepit miser, base ignoble wretch!

I am descended of a gentler blood.

Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.

Peasant, avaunt!—You have suborned this man

Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.

First, let me tell you whom you have condemned:

Not one begotten of a shepherd swain,

But issued from the progeny of kings,

Virtuous and holy, chosen from above

By inspiration of celestial grace

To work exceeding miracles on earth.

I never had to do with wicked spirits.

But you, that are polluted with your lusts,

Stained with the guiltless blood of innocents,

Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,

Because you want the grace that others have,

You judge it straight a thing impossible

To compass wonders but by help of devils.

No, misconceivèd! Joan of Arc hath been

A virgin from her tender infancy,

Chaste and immaculate in very thought,

Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused,

Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.

Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?

Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity,

That warranteth by law to be thy privilege:

I am with child, you bloody homicides.

Murder not then the fruit within my womb,

Although you hale me to a violent death.

You are deceived; my child is none of his.

It was Alanson that enjoyed my love.

O, give me leave! I have deluded you.

’Twas neither Charles nor yet the Duke I named,

But Reignier, King of Naples, that prevailed.

Then lead me hence, with whom I leave my curse:

May never glorious sun reflex his beams

Upon the country where you make abode,

But darkness and the gloomy shade of death

Environ you, till mischief and despair

Drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves.

