


What’s he that goes there?

He that was in question for the robbery?

What, to York? Call him back again.

I am sure he is, to the hearing of

anything good.—Go pluck him by the elbow. I must

speak with him.

Sir John Falstaff, a word with you.

Sir John, I sent for you before your

expedition to Shrewsbury.

I talk not of his Majesty. You would not

come when I sent for you.

Well, God mend him. I pray you let me

speak with you.

What tell you me of it? Be it as it is.

I think you are fallen into the disease,

for you hear not what I say to you.

To punish you by the heels would amend

the attention of your ears, and I care not if I do

become your physician.

I sent for you, when there were matters

against you for your life, to come speak with me.

Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in

great infamy.

Your means are very slender, and your

waste is great.

You have misled the youthful prince.

Well, I am loath to gall a new-healed

wound. Your day’s service at Shrewsbury hath a

little gilded over your night’s exploit on Gad’s Hill.

You may thank th’ unquiet time for your quiet

o’erposting that action.

But since all is well, keep it so. Wake not

a sleeping wolf.

What, you are as a candle, the better

part burnt out.

There is not a white hair in your face but

should have his effect of gravity.

You follow the young prince up and

down like his ill angel.

Do you set down your name in the scroll

of youth, that are written down old with all the

characters of age? Have you not a moist eye, a dry

hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard, a decreasing

leg, an increasing belly? Is not your voice broken,

your wind short, your chin double, your wit single,

and every part about you blasted with antiquity?

And will you yet call yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir

John.

Well, God send the Prince a better

companion.

Well, the King hath severed you and

Prince Harry. I hear you are going with Lord John

of Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of

Northumberland.

Well, be honest, be honest, and God

bless your expedition.

Not a penny, not a penny. You are too

impatient to bear crosses. Fare you well. Commend

me to my cousin Westmoreland.

What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!

How now, Sir John? What, are you brawling here?

Doth this become your place, your time, and business?

You should have been well on your way to York.—

Stand from him, fellow. Wherefore hang’st thou

upon him?

For what sum?

How comes this, Sir John? Fie, what

man of good temper would endure this tempest of

exclamation? Are you not ashamed to enforce a

poor widow to so rough a course to come by her

own?

Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted

with your manner of wrenching the true cause the

false way. It is not a confident brow, nor the throng

of words that come with such more than impudent

sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level

consideration. You have, as it appears to me, practiced

upon the easy-yielding spirit of this woman,

and made her serve your uses both in purse and in

person.

Pray thee, peace.—Pay her the debt you

owe her, and unpay the villainy you have done with

her. The one you may do with sterling money, and

the other with current repentance.

You speak as having power to do wrong;

but answer in th’ effect of your reputation, and

satisfy the poor woman.

Now, Master Gower, what news?

I have heard better news.

Where lay the King

tonight?

Come all his forces back?

You shall have letters of me presently.

Come. Go along with me, good Master Gower.

What’s the matter?

Sir John, you loiter here too long, being

you are to take soldiers up in counties as you go.

What foolish master taught you these

manners, Sir John?

Now the Lord lighten thee. Thou art a

great fool.

How doth the King?

I hope, not dead.

I would his Majesty had called me with him.

The service that I truly did his life

Hath left me open to all injuries.

I know he doth not, and do arm myself

To welcome the condition of the time,

Which cannot look more hideously upon me

Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.

O God, I fear all will be overturned.

Peace be with us, lest we be heavier.

Sweet princes, what I did I did in honor,

Led by th’ impartial conduct of my soul;

And never shall you see that I will beg

A ragged and forestalled remission.

If truth and upright innocency fail me,

I’ll to the king my master that is dead

And tell him who hath sent me after him.

Good morrow, and God save your Majesty.

I am assured, if I be measured rightly,

Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.

I then did use the person of your father;

The image of his power lay then in me.

And in th’ administration of his law,

Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,

Your Highness pleasèd to forget my place,

The majesty and power of law and justice,

The image of the King whom I presented,

And struck me in my very seat of judgment,

Whereon, as an offender to your father,

I gave bold way to my authority

And did commit you. If the deed were ill,

Be you contented, wearing now the garland,

To have a son set your decrees at nought?

To pluck down justice from your awful bench?

To trip the course of law and blunt the sword

That guards the peace and safety of your person?

Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image

And mock your workings in a second body?

Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;

Be now the father and propose a son,

Hear your own dignity so much profaned,

See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,

Behold yourself so by a son disdained,

And then imagine me taking your part

And in your power soft silencing your son.

After this cold considerance, sentence me,

And, as you are a king, speak in your state

What I have done that misbecame my place,

My person, or my liege’s sovereignty.

Have you your wits? Know you what ’tis you speak?

Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet.

Take all his company along with him.

I cannot now speak. I will hear you soon.— Take them away.

And so they are.

He hath.

