


Better than I was. Hem.

A pox damn you, you muddy rascal. Is that all the

comfort you give me?

I make them? Gluttony and diseases make them;

I make them not.

Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.

Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!

Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full

hogshead? There’s a whole merchant’s venture of

Bordeaux stuff in him. You have not seen a hulk

better stuffed in the hold.—Come, I’ll be friends

with thee, Jack. Thou art going to the wars, and

whether I shall ever see thee again or no, there is

nobody cares.

Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come

hither. It is the foul-mouthed’st rogue in England.

So you do, hostess.

Charge me? I scorn you, scurvy companion.

What, you poor, base, rascally, cheating lack-linen

mate! Away, you mouldy rogue, away! I am meat for

your master.

Away, you cutpurse rascal, you filthy bung, away!

By this wine, I’ll thrust my knife in your mouldy

chaps an you play the saucy cuttle with me. Away,

you bottle-ale rascal, you basket-hilt stale juggler,

you. Since when, I pray you, sir? God’s light, with

two points on your shoulder? Much!

Captain? Thou abominable damned cheater, art

thou not ashamed to be called captain? An captains

were of my mind, they would truncheon you out for

taking their names upon you before you have

earned them. You a captain? You slave, for what?

For tearing a poor whore’s ruff in a bawdy house?

He a captain! Hang him, rogue. He lives upon

mouldy stewed prunes and dried cakes. A captain?

God’s light, these villains will make the word as

odious as the word “occupy,” which was an excellent

good word before it was ill sorted. Therefore

captains had need look to ’t.

For God’s sake, thrust him downstairs. I cannot

endure such a fustian rascal.

I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee do not draw.

I pray thee, Jack, be quiet. The rascal’s gone. Ah,

you whoreson little valiant villain, you.

Ah, you sweet little rogue, you. Alas, poor ape,

how thou sweat’st! Come, let me wipe thy face.

Come on, you whoreson chops. Ah, rogue, i’ faith, I

love thee. Thou art as valorous as Hector of Troy,

worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better

than the Nine Worthies. Ah, villain!

Do, an thou darest for thy heart. An thou dost, I’ll

canvass thee between a pair of sheets.

I’ faith, and thou followed’st him like a church.

Thou whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig,

when wilt thou leave fighting a-days and foining a-nights

and begin to patch up thine old body for

heaven?

Sirrah, what humor’s the Prince of?

They say Poins has a good wit.

Why does the Prince love him so then?

By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant

heart.

I love thee better than I love e’er a scurvy young

boy of them all.

By my troth, thou ’lt set me a-weeping an thou

sayst so. Prove that ever I dress myself handsome till

thy return. Well, harken a’ th’ end.

How? You fat fool, I scorn you.

What says your Grace?

I cannot speak. If my heart be not ready to

burst—well, sweet Jack, have a care of thyself.

Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie! Come on, I’ll tell

thee what, thou damned tripe-visaged rascal: an the

child I now go with do miscarry, thou wert better

thou hadst struck thy mother, thou paper-faced

villain.

I’ll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will

have you as soundly swinged for this, you bluebottle

rogue, you filthy famished correctioner. If you be

not swinged, I’ll forswear half-kirtles.

Come, you rogue, come, bring me to a justice.

Goodman Death, Goodman Bones!

Come, you thin thing, come, you rascal.

