


Come on, come on, come on. Give me your

hand, sir, give me your hand, sir. An early stirrer, by

the rood. And how doth my good cousin Silence?

And how doth my cousin your bedfellow?

And your fairest daughter and mine, my goddaughter

Ellen?

By yea and no, sir. I dare say my cousin

William is become a good scholar. He is at Oxford

still, is he not?

He must then to the Inns o’ Court shortly. I

was once of Clement’s Inn, where I think they will

talk of mad Shallow yet.

By the Mass, I was called anything, and I

would have done anything indeed too, and roundly

too. There was I, and little John Doit of Staffordshire,

and black George Barnes, and Francis Pickbone,

and Will Squele, a Cotswold man. You had

not four such swinge-bucklers in all the Inns o’

Court again. And I may say to you, we knew where

the bona robas were and had the best of them all at

commandment. Then was Jack Falstaff, now Sir

John, a boy, and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of

Norfolk.

The same Sir John, the very same. I see him

break Scoggin’s head at the court gate, when he

was a crack not thus high; and the very same day did

I fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a fruiterer,

behind Grey’s Inn. Jesu, Jesu, the mad days that I

have spent! And to see how many of my old acquaintance

are dead.

Certain, ’tis certain, very sure, very sure.

Death, as the Psalmist saith, is certain to all. All

shall die. How a good yoke of bullocks at Stamford

Fair?

Death is certain. Is old Dooble of your town

living yet?

Jesu, Jesu, dead! He drew a good bow, and

dead? He shot a fine shoot. John o’ Gaunt loved him

well, and betted much money on his head. Dead! He

would have clapped i’ th’ clout at twelve score, and

carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen

and a half, that it would have done a man’s

heart good to see. How a score of ewes now?

And is old Dooble dead?

Good morrow, honest gentlemen.

I am Robert Shallow, sir, a poor esquire of

this county and one of the King’s justices of the

peace. What is your good pleasure with me?

He greets me well, sir. I knew him a good

backsword man. How doth the good knight? May I

ask how my lady his wife doth?

It is well said, in faith, sir, and it is well said

indeed too. “Better accommodated.” It is good,

yea, indeed is it. Good phrases are surely, and ever

were, very commendable. “Accommodated.” It

comes of accommodo. Very good, a good phrase.

It is very just. Look, here comes good Sir

John.—Give me your good hand, give me your

Worship’s good hand. By my troth, you like well and

bear your years very well. Welcome, good Sir John.

No, Sir John. It is my cousin Silence, in

commission with me.

Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit?

Where’s the roll? Where’s the roll? Where’s

the roll? Let me see, let me see, let me see. So, so,

so, so, so. So, so. Yea, marry, sir.—Rafe Mouldy!—

Let them appear as I call, let them do so, let them

do so.

Let me see, where is Mouldy?

What think you, Sir John? A good-limbed

fellow, young, strong, and of good friends.

Ha, ha, ha, most excellent, i’ faith! Things

that are mouldy lack use. Very singular good, in

faith. Well said, Sir John, very well said.

Peace, fellow, peace. Stand aside. Know you

where you are?—For th’ other, Sir John. Let me

see.—Simon Shadow!

Where’s Shadow?

Do you like him, Sir John?

Thomas Wart!

Shall I prick him down, Sir John?

Ha, ha, ha. You can do it, sir, you can do it. I

commend you well.—Francis Feeble!

What trade art thou, Feeble?

Shall I prick him, sir?

Peter Bullcalf o’ th’ green.

Here is two more called than your number.

You must have but four here, sir, and so I pray you

go in with me to dinner.

O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay

all night in the windmill in Saint George’s Field?

Ha, ’twas a merry night. And is Jane Nightwork

alive?

She never could away with me.

By the Mass, I could anger her to th’ heart.

She was then a bona roba. Doth she hold her own

well?

Nay, she must be old. She cannot choose but

be old. Certain, she’s old, and had Robin Nightwork

by old Nightwork before I came to Clement’s Inn.

Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that

that this knight and I have seen!—Ha, Sir John, said

I well?

That we have, that we have, that we have. In

faith, Sir John, we have. Our watchword was “Hem,

boys.” Come, let’s to dinner, come, let’s to dinner.

Jesus, the days that we have seen! Come, come.

Four of which you please.

Come, Sir John, which four will you have?

Marry, then, Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and

Shadow.

Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong.

They are your likeliest men, and I would have you

served with the best.

He is not his craft’s master. He doth not do it

right. I remember at Mile End Green, when I lay at

Clement’s Inn—I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthur’s

show—there was a little quiver fellow, and he

would manage you his piece thus.

And he would about and

about, and come you in, and come you in. “Rah,

tah, tah,” would he say. “Bounce,” would he say,

and away again would he go, and again would he

come. I shall ne’er see such a fellow.

Sir John, the Lord bless you. God prosper

your affairs. God send us peace. At your return, visit

our house. Let our old acquaintance be renewed.

Peradventure I will with you to the court.

Go to. I have spoke at a word. God keep you.

By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away

tonight.—What, Davy, I say!

I will not excuse you. You shall not be

excused. Excuses shall not be admitted. There is no

excuse shall serve. You shall not be excused.—

Why, Davy!

Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see, Davy, let

me see, Davy, let me see. Yea, marry, William cook,

bid him come hither.—Sir John, you shall not be

excused.

With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook,

are there no young pigeons?

Let it be cast and paid.—Sir John, you shall

not be excused.

He shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a

couple of short-legged hens, a joint of mutton, and

any pretty little tiny kickshaws, tell William cook.

Yea, Davy, I will use him well. A friend i’ th’

court is better than a penny in purse. Use his men

well, Davy, for they are arrant knaves and will

backbite.

Well-conceited, Davy. About thy business,

Davy.

There is many complaints, Davy, against that

Visor. That Visor is an arrant knave, on my

knowledge.

Go to, I say, he shall have no wrong. Look

about, Davy. Where are you, Sir John?

Come, come, come, off with your boots.—Give me

your hand, Master Bardolph.

I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master

Bardolph, and welcome, my tall

fellow.—Come, Sir John.

Sir John.

Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an

arbor, we will eat a last year’s pippin of mine own

graffing, with a dish of caraways, and so forth.—

Come, cousin Silence.—And then to bed.

Barren, barren, barren, beggars all, beggars

all, Sir John. Marry, good air.—Spread, Davy,

spread, Davy. Well said, Davy.

A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good

varlet, Sir John. By the Mass, I have drunk too

much sack at supper. A good varlet. Now sit down,

now sit down.—Come, cousin.

Give Master Bardolph some wine, Davy.

Be merry, Master Bardolph.—And, my little

soldier there, be merry.

Davy!

Honest Bardolph, welcome. If thou want’st

anything and wilt not call, beshrew thy heart.—

Welcome, my little tiny thief, and welcome indeed

too. I’ll drink to Master Bardolph, and to all the

cabileros about London.

By the Mass, you’ll crack a quart together,

ha, will you not, Master Bardolph?

By God’s liggens, I thank thee. The knave

will stick by thee, I can assure thee that. He will not

out, he. ’Tis true bred!

Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing, be

merry. Look who’s at door

there, ho. Who knocks?

Honest gentleman, I know not your

breeding.

Give me pardon, sir. If, sir, you come with

news from the court, I take it there’s but two ways,

either to utter them, or to conceal them. I am, sir,

under the King in some authority.

Under King Harry.

Harry the Fourth.

It doth so.

It doth so.

It doth, it doth, it doth.

It is best, certain.

’Tis so indeed.

Yea, marry, Sir John, which I beseech you to

let me have home with me.

I cannot well perceive how, unless you

should give me your doublet and stuff me out with

straw. I beseech you, good Sir John, let me have five

hundred of my thousand.

A color that I fear you will die in, Sir John.

