


Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my

water?

Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me.

The brain of this foolish-compounded clay, man, is

not able to invent anything that intends to laughter

more than I invent, or is invented on me. I am not

only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in

other men. I do here walk before thee like a sow

that hath overwhelmed all her litter but one. If the

Prince put thee into my service for any other reason

than to set me off, why then I have no judgment.

Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be

worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. I was never

manned with an agate till now, but I will inset you

neither in gold nor silver, but in vile apparel, and

send you back again to your master for a jewel. The

juvenal, the Prince your master, whose chin is not

yet fledge—I will sooner have a beard grow in the

palm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek,

and yet he will not stick to say his face is a face

royal. God may finish it when He will. ’Tis not a hair

amiss yet. He may keep it still at a face royal, for a

barber shall never earn sixpence out of it, and yet

he’ll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his

father was a bachelor. He may keep his own grace,

but he’s almost out of mine, I can assure him. What

said Master Dommelton about the satin for my

short cloak and my slops?

Let him be damned like the glutton! Pray

God his tongue be hotter! A whoreson Achitophel, a

rascally yea-forsooth knave, to bear a gentleman in

hand and then stand upon security! The whoreson

smoothy-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes

and bunches of keys at their girdles; and if a man is

through with them in honest taking up, then they

must stand upon security. I had as lief they would

put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop it with

“security.” I looked he should have sent me two-and-twenty

yards of satin, as I am a true knight, and

he sends me “security.” Well, he may sleep in

security, for he hath the horn of abundance, and the

lightness of his wife shines through it, and yet

cannot he see though he have his own lantern to

light him. Where’s Bardolph?

I bought him in Paul’s, and he’ll buy me a

horse in Smithfield. An I could get me but a wife in

the stews, I were manned, horsed, and wived.

Wait close. I will not see him.

Boy, tell him I am deaf.

What, a young knave and begging? Is there

not wars? Is there not employment? Doth not the

King lack subjects? Do not the rebels need soldiers?

Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is

worse shame to beg than to be on the worst side,

were it worse than the name of rebellion can tell

how to make it.

Why sir, did I say you were an honest man?

Setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, I

had lied in my throat if I had said so.

I give thee leave to tell me so? I lay aside that

which grows to me? If thou gett’st any leave of me,

hang me; if thou tak’st leave, thou wert better be

hanged. You hunt counter. Hence! Avaunt!

My good lord. God give your Lordship good

time of the day. I am glad to see your Lordship

abroad. I heard say your Lordship was sick. I hope

your Lordship goes abroad by advice. Your Lordship,

though not clean past your youth, have yet

some smack of an ague in you, some relish of the

saltness of time in you, and I most humbly beseech

your Lordship to have a reverend care of your

health.

An ’t please your Lordship, I hear his Majesty

is returned with some discomfort from Wales.

And I hear, moreover, his Highness is fallen

into this same whoreson apoplexy.

This apoplexy, as I take it, is a kind of

lethargy, an ’t please your Lordship, a kind of

sleeping in the blood, a whoreson tingling.

It hath it original from much grief, from

study, and perturbation of the brain. I have read the

cause of his effects in Galen. It is a kind of deafness.

Very well, my lord, very well. Rather, an ’t

please you, it is the disease of not listening, the

malady of not marking, that I am troubled withal.

I am as poor as Job, my lord, but not so

patient. Your Lordship may minister the potion of

imprisonment to me in respect of poverty, but how

I should be your patient to follow your prescriptions,

the wise may make some dram of a scruple,

or indeed a scruple itself.

As I was then advised by my learned counsel

in the laws of this land-service, I did not come.

He that buckles himself in my belt cannot

live in less.

I would it were otherwise. I would my means

were greater and my waist slender.

The young prince hath misled me. I am the

fellow with the great belly, and he my dog.

My lord.

To wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox.

A wassail candle, my lord, all tallow. If I did

say of wax, my growth would approve the truth.

His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.

Not so, my lord. Your ill angel is light, but I

hope he that looks upon me will take me without

weighing. And yet in some respects I grant I cannot

go. I cannot tell. Virtue is of so little regard in these

costermongers’ times that true valor is turned bearherd;

pregnancy is made a tapster, and hath his

quick wit wasted in giving reckonings. All the other

gifts appurtenant to man, as the malice of this age

shapes them, are not worth a gooseberry. You that

are old consider not the capacities of us that are

young. You do measure the heat of our livers with

the bitterness of your galls, and we that are in the

vaward of our youth, I must confess, are wags too.

My lord, I was born about three of the clock

in the afternoon, with a white head and something

a round belly. For my voice, I have lost it with

halloing and singing of anthems. To approve my

youth further, I will not. The truth is, I am only old

in judgment and understanding. And he that will

caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend

me the money, and have at him. For the box of the

ear that the Prince gave you, he gave it like a rude

prince, and you took it like a sensible lord. I have

checked him for it, and the young lion repents.

Marry, not in ashes and sackcloth, but in

new silk and old sack.

God send the companion a better prince. I

cannot rid my hands of him.

Yea, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it. But

look you pray, all you that kiss my Lady Peace at

home, that our armies join not in a hot day, for, by

the Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, and I

mean not to sweat extraordinarily. If it be a hot day

and I brandish anything but a bottle, I would I

might never spit white again. There is not a dangerous

action can peep out his head but I am thrust

upon it. Well, I cannot last ever. But it was always

yet the trick of our English nation, if they have a

good thing, to make it too common. If you will

needs say I am an old man, you should give me rest.

I would to God my name were not so terrible to the

enemy as it is. I were better to be eaten to death

with a rust than to be scoured to nothing with

perpetual motion.

Will your Lordship lend me a thousand

pound to furnish me forth?

If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. A

man can no more separate age and covetousness

than he can part young limbs and lechery; but the

gout galls the one, and the pox pinches the other,

and so both the degrees prevent my curses.—Boy!

What money is in my purse?

I can get no remedy against this consumption

of the purse. Borrowing only lingers and lingers

it out, but the disease is incurable.

Go bear this letter to my Lord

of Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earl

of Westmoreland, and this to old Mistress Ursula,

whom I have weekly sworn to marry since I perceived

the first white hair of my chin. About it. You

know where to find me. A pox of this

gout! Or a gout of this pox, for the one or the other

plays the rogue with my great toe. ’Tis no matter if I

do halt. I have the wars for my color, and my

pension shall seem the more reasonable. A good wit

will make use of anything. I will turn diseases to

commodity.

How now, whose mare’s dead? What’s the

matter?

Away, varlets!—Draw, Bardolph. Cut me off

the villain’s head. Throw the quean in the

channel.

Keep them off, Bardolph.

I think I am as like to ride the mare if I have

any vantage of ground to get up.

What is the gross sum that I owe thee?

My lord, this is a poor mad soul, and she says

up and down the town that her eldest son is like

you. She hath been in good case, and the truth is,

poverty hath distracted her. But, for these foolish

officers, I beseech you I may have redress against

them.

My lord, I will not undergo this sneap without

reply. You call honorable boldness “impudent

sauciness.” If a man will make curtsy and say

nothing, he is virtuous. No, my lord, my humble

duty remembered, I will not be your suitor. I say to

you, I do desire deliverance from these officers,

being upon hasty employment in the King’s affairs.

Come hither, hostess.

As I am a gentleman!

As I am a gentleman. Come. No more words

of it.

Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking. And for

thy walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the

Prodigal or the German hunting in waterwork is

worth a thousand of these bed-hangers and these

fly-bitten tapestries. Let it be ten pound, if thou

canst. Come, an ’twere not for thy humors, there’s

not a better wench in England. Go wash thy face,

and draw the action. Come, thou must not be in this

humor with me. Dost not know me? Come, come. I

know thou wast set on to this.

Let it alone. I’ll make other shift. You’ll be a

fool still.

Will I live? Go with her,

with her. Hook on, hook on.

No more words. Let’s have her.

What’s the news, my good

lord?

I hope, my lord, all’s

well. What is the news, my lord?

Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?

My lord!

Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to

dinner?

Will you sup with me, Master Gower?

Master Gower, if they become me not, he was

a fool that taught them me.—This is the right

fencing grace, my lord: tap for tap, and so part fair.

When Arthur first in court—

Empty the jordan.

And was a worthy king—

How now, Mistress Doll?

So is all her sect. An they be once in a calm,

they are sick.

You make fat rascals, Mistress Doll.

If the cook help to make the gluttony, you

help to make the diseases, Doll. We catch of you,

Doll, we catch of you. Grant that, my poor virtue,

grant that.

Your brooches, pearls, and ouches—for to

serve bravely is to come halting off, you know; to

come off the breach with his pike bent bravely, and

to surgery bravely, to venture upon the charged

chambers bravely—

Dost thou hear, hostess?

Dost thou hear? It is mine ancient.

He’s no swaggerer, hostess, a tame cheater, i’

faith. You may stroke him as gently as a puppy

greyhound. He’ll not swagger with a Barbary hen if

her feathers turn back in any show of resistance.—

Call him up, drawer.

Welcome, Ancient Pistol. Here, Pistol, I

charge you with a cup of sack. Do you discharge

upon mine hostess.

She is pistol-proof. Sir, you shall not hardly

offend her.

No more, Pistol. I would not have you go off

here. Discharge yourself of our company, Pistol.

Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll.

Pistol, I would be quiet.

Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a shove-groat

shilling. Nay, an he do nothing but speak

nothing, he shall be nothing here.

Give me my rapier, boy.

Get you downstairs.

Have you turned him out o’ doors?

A rascal to brave me!

Ah, rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a

blanket.

Let them play.—Play, sirs.—Sit on my knee,

Doll. A rascal bragging slave! The rogue fled from

me like quicksilver.

Peace, good Doll. Do not speak like a death’s-head;

do not bid me remember mine end.

A good shallow young fellow, he would have

made a good pantler; he would ’a chipped bread

well.

He a good wit? Hang him, baboon. His wit’s

as thick as Tewkesbury mustard. There’s no more

conceit in him than is in a mallet.

Because their legs are both of a bigness, and

he plays at quoits well, and eats conger and fennel,

and drinks off candles’ ends for flap-dragons, and

rides the wild mare with the boys, and jumps upon

joint stools, and swears with a good grace, and

wears his boots very smooth like unto the sign of

the Leg, and breeds no bate with telling of discreet

stories, and such other gambol faculties he has that

show a weak mind and an able body, for the which

the Prince admits him; for the Prince himself is

such another. The weight of a hair will turn the

scales between their avoirdupois.

Kiss me, Doll.

Thou dost give me flattering busses.

I am old, I am old.

What stuff wilt thou have a kirtle of? I shall

receive money o’ Thursday; thou shalt have a cap

tomorrow. A merry song! Come, it grows late. We’ll

to bed. Thou ’lt forget me when I am gone.

Some sack, Francis.

Ha? A bastard son of the King’s?—And art

not thou Poins his brother?

A better than thou. I am a gentleman. Thou

art a drawer.

Thou whoreson mad compound

of majesty, by this light flesh and corrupt blood,

thou art welcome.

Didst thou hear me?

No, no, no, not so. I did not think thou wast

within hearing.

No abuse, Hal, o’ mine honor, no abuse.

No abuse, Hal.

No abuse, Ned, i’ th’ world, honest Ned,

none. I dispraised him before the wicked,

that the wicked might not fall in love with

thee; in which doing, I have done the part of a

careful friend and a true subject, and thy father is to

give me thanks for it. No abuse, Hal.—None, Ned,

none. No, faith, boys, none.

The fiend hath pricked down Bardolph irrecoverable,

and his face is Lucifer’s privy kitchen,

where he doth nothing but roast malt-worms. For

the boy, there is a good angel about him, but the

devil blinds him too.

For one of them, she’s in hell already and

burns poor souls. For th’ other, I owe her money,

and whether she be damned for that I know not.

No, I think thou art not. I think thou art quit

for that. Marry, there is another indictment upon

thee for suffering flesh to be eaten in thy house

contrary to the law, for the which I think thou wilt

howl.

His grace says that which his flesh rebels

against.

Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the

night, and we must hence and leave it unpicked.

More knocking at the

door? How now, what’s the

matter?

Pay the musicians, sirrah.—

Farewell, hostess.—Farewell, Doll. You see, my

good wenches, how men of merit are sought after.

The undeserver may sleep when the man of action

is called on. Farewell, good wenches. If I be not sent

away post, I will see you again ere I go.

Farewell, farewell.

I am glad to see you well, good Master

Robert Shallow.—Master Sure-card, as I think?

Good Master Silence, it well befits you

should be of the peace.

Fie, this is hot weather, gentlemen. Have you

provided me here half a dozen sufficient men?

Let me see them, I beseech you.

Is thy name Mouldy?

’Tis the more time thou wert used.

Prick him.

Go to. Peace, Mouldy. You shall go. Mouldy,

it is time you were spent.

Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under.

He’s like to be a cold soldier.

Shadow, whose son art thou?

Thy mother’s son! Like enough, and thy

father’s shadow. So the son of the female is the

shadow of the male. It is often so, indeed, but much

of the father’s substance.

Shadow will serve for summer. Prick him,

for we have a number of shadows to fill up the

muster book.

Where’s he?

Is thy name Wart?

Thou art a very ragged wart.

It were superfluous, for his apparel is built

upon his back, and the whole frame stands upon

pins. Prick him no more.

You may, but if he had been a man’s tailor,

he’d ha’ pricked you.—Wilt thou make as many

holes in an enemy’s battle as thou hast done in a

woman’s petticoat?

Well said, good woman’s tailor, well said,

courageous Feeble. Thou wilt be as valiant as the

wrathful dove or most magnanimous mouse.—

Prick the woman’s tailor well, Master Shallow,

deep, Master Shallow.

I would thou wert a man’s tailor, that thou

mightst mend him and make him fit to go. I cannot

put him to a private soldier that is the leader of so

many thousands. Let that suffice, most forcible

Feeble.

I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble.—Who

is the next?

Yea, marry, let’s see Bullcalf.

Fore God, a likely fellow. Come, prick me

Bullcalf till he roar again.

What, dost thou roar before thou art

pricked?

What disease hast thou?

Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown.

We will have away thy cold, and I will take such

order that thy friends shall ring for thee.—Is here

all?

Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot

tarry dinner. I am glad to see you, by my troth,

Master Shallow.

No more of that, good Master Shallow, no

more of that.

She lives, Master Shallow.

Never, never. She would always say she could

not abide Master Shallow.

Old, old, Master Shallow.

We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master

Shallow.

Come, sir, which men shall I have?

Go to, well.

Do you choose for me.

Mouldy and Bullcalf! For you, Mouldy, stay

at home till you are past service.—And for your

part, Bullcalf, grow till you come unto it. I will

none of you.

Will you tell me, Master Shallow, how to

choose a man? Care I for the limb, the thews, the

stature, bulk and big assemblance of a man? Give

me the spirit, Master Shallow. Here’s Wart. You see

what a ragged appearance it is. He shall charge you

and discharge you with the motion of a pewterer’s

hammer, come off and on swifter than he that

gibbets on the brewer’s bucket. And this same half-faced

fellow, Shadow, give me this man. He presents

no mark to the enemy. The foeman may with

as great aim level at the edge of a penknife. And for

a retreat, how swiftly will this Feeble, the woman’s

tailor, run off! O, give me the spare men, and spare

me the great ones.—Put me a caliver into Wart’s

hand, Bardolph.

Come, manage me your caliver: so,

very well, go to, very good, exceeding good. O, give

me always a little, lean, old, chopped, bald shot.

Well said, i’ faith, Wart. Th’ art a good scab. Hold,

there’s a tester for thee.

These fellows will do well, Master Shallow.

—God keep you, Master Silence. I will not use

many words with you. Fare you well, gentlemen

both. I thank you. I must a dozen mile tonight.—

Bardolph, give the soldiers coats.

Fore God, would you would, Master

Shallow.

Fare you well, gentle gentlemen.

On, Bardolph. Lead the men away.

As I return, I will fetch off these justices. I do see

the bottom of Justice Shallow. Lord, Lord, how

subject we old men are to this vice of lying. This

same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to

me of the wildness of his youth and the feats he hath

done about Turnbull Street, and every third word a

lie, duer paid to the hearer than the Turk’s tribute. I

do remember him at Clement’s Inn, like a man

made after supper of a cheese paring. When he was

naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked radish

with a head fantastically carved upon it with a

knife. He was so forlorn that his dimensions to

any thick sight were invincible. He was the very

genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkey,

and the whores called him “mandrake.” He came

ever in the rearward of the fashion, and sung

those tunes to the overscutched huswives that he

heard the carmen whistle, and swore they were his

fancies or his good-nights. And now is this Vice’s

dagger become a squire, and talks as familiarly

of John o’ Gaunt as if he had been sworn brother

to him, and I’ll be sworn he ne’er saw him but

once in the tilt-yard, and then he burst his head

for crowding among the Marshal’s men. I saw it

and told John o’ Gaunt he beat his own name, for

you might have thrust him and all his apparel into

an eel-skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a

mansion for him, a court. And now has he land and

beefs. Well, I’ll be acquainted with him if I return,

and ’t shall go hard but I’ll make him a philosopher’s

two stones to me. If the young dace be a

bait for the old pike, I see no reason in the law of

nature but I may snap at him. Let time shape, and

there an end.

What’s your name, sir? Of what condition are

you, and of what place, I pray?

Well then, Colevile is your name, a knight is

your degree, and your place the Dale. Colevile shall

be still your name, a traitor your degree, and the

dungeon your place, a place deep enough so shall

you be still Colevile of the Dale.

As good a man as he, sir, whoe’er I am. Do

you yield, sir, or shall I sweat for you? If I do sweat,

they are the drops of thy lovers and they weep for

thy death. Therefore rouse up fear and trembling,

and do observance to my mercy.

I have a whole school of tongues in this belly

of mine, and not a tongue of them all speaks any

other word but my name. An I had but a belly of any

indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in

Europe. My womb, my womb, my womb undoes

me. Here comes our general.

I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be

thus. I never knew yet but rebuke and check was the

reward of valor. Do you think me a swallow, an

arrow, or a bullet? Have I in my poor and old

motion the expedition of thought? I have speeded

hither with the very extremest inch of possibility. I

have foundered ninescore and odd posts, and here,

travel-tainted as I am, have in my pure and immaculate

valor taken Sir John Colevile of the Dale, a most

furious knight and valorous enemy. But what of

that? He saw me and yielded, that I may justly say,

with the hook-nosed fellow of Rome, “There, cousin,

I came, saw, and overcame.”

I know not. Here he is, and here I yield him.

And I beseech your Grace let it be booked with the

rest of this day’s deeds, or, by the Lord, I will have it

in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture

on the top on ’t, Colevile kissing my foot; to the

which course if I be enforced, if you do not all show

like gilt twopences to me, and I in the clear sky of

fame o’ershine you as much as the full moon doth

the cinders of the element (which show like pins’

heads to her), believe not the word of the noble.

Therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.

Let it shine, then.

Let it do something, my good lord, that may

do me good, and call it what you will.

And a famous true subject took him.

I know not how they sold themselves, but

thou, like a kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis,

and I thank thee for thee.

My lord, I beseech you give me leave to go

through Gloucestershire, and, when you come to

court, stand my good lord, pray, in your good

report.

I would you had but the wit; ’twere better

than your dukedom. Good faith, this same young

sober-blooded boy doth not love me, nor a man

cannot make him laugh. But that’s no marvel; he

drinks no wine. There’s never none of these demure

boys come to any proof, for thin drink doth so

overcool their blood, and making many fish meals,

that they fall into a kind of male green-sickness, and

then, when they marry, they get wenches. They are

generally fools and cowards, which some of us

should be too, but for inflammation. A good sherris

sack hath a two-fold operation in it. It ascends me

into the brain, dries me there all the foolish and

dull and crudy vapors which environ it, makes it

apprehensive, quick, forgetive, full of nimble, fiery,

and delectable shapes, which, delivered o’er to the

voice, the tongue, which is the birth, becomes

excellent wit. The second property of your excellent

sherris is the warming of the blood, which,

before cold and settled, left the liver white and pale,

which is the badge of pusillanimity and cowardice.

But the sherris warms it and makes it course from

the inwards to the parts’ extremes. It illumineth the

face, which as a beacon gives warning to all the rest

of this little kingdom, man, to arm; and then the

vital commoners and inland petty spirits muster me

all to their captain, the heart, who, great and puffed

up with this retinue, doth any deed of courage, and

this valor comes of sherris. So that skill in the

weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets it

a-work; and learning a mere hoard of gold kept

by a devil till sack commences it and sets it in

act and use. Hereof comes it that Prince Harry is

valiant, for the cold blood he did naturally inherit

of his father he hath, like lean, sterile, and bare

land, manured, husbanded, and tilled with excellent

endeavor of drinking good and good store

of fertile sherris, that he is become very hot and valiant.

If I had a thousand sons, the first human principle

I would teach them should be to forswear

thin potations and to addict themselves to sack.

How now, Bardolph?

Let them go. I’ll through Gloucestershire,

and there will I visit Master Robert Shallow,

Esquire. I have him already temp’ring between my

finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal with

him. Come away.

You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.

I’ll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow.

Bardolph, look to our horses.

If I were sawed into quantities,

I should make four dozen of such bearded hermits’

staves as Master Shallow. It is a wonderful thing to

see the semblable coherence of his men’s spirits

and his. They, by observing of him, do bear

themselves like foolish justices; he, by conversing

with them, is turned into a justice-like servingman.

Their spirits are so married in conjunction with the

participation of society that they flock together in

consent like so many wild geese. If I had a suit to

Master Shallow, I would humor his men with the

imputation of being near their master; if to his men,

I would curry with Master Shallow that no man

could better command his servants. It is certain

that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is

caught, as men take diseases, one of another. Therefore

let men take heed of their company. I will

devise matter enough out of this Shallow to keep

Prince Harry in continual laughter the wearing out

of six fashions, which is four terms, or two actions,

and he shall laugh without intervallums. O, it is

much that a lie with a slight oath and a jest with a

sad brow will do with a fellow that never had the

ache in his shoulders. O, you shall see him laugh till

his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up.

I come, Master Shallow, I come, Master

Shallow.

Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling,

and a rich.

This Davy serves you for good uses. He is

your servingman and your husband.

There’s a merry heart!—Good Master Silence,

I’ll give you a health for that anon.

I did not think Master Silence had been a

man of this mettle.

Well said, Master Silence.

Health and long life to you, Master Silence.

Why, now you have done me right.

’Tis so.

From the court? Let him come in.

How now, Pistol?

What wind blew you hither, Pistol?

I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of

this world.

O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news?

Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.

What, is the old king dead?

Away, Bardolph.—Saddle my horse.—

Master Robert Shallow, choose what office thou

wilt in the land, ’tis thine.—Pistol, I will double-charge

thee with dignities.

Carry Master Silence to bed.—Master Shallow,

my Lord Shallow, be what thou wilt. I am

Fortune’s steward. Get on thy boots. We’ll ride all

night.—O sweet Pistol!—Away, Bardolph!—Come,

Pistol, utter more to me, and withal devise something

to do thyself good.—Boot, boot, Master Shallow.

I know the young king is sick for me. Let us

take any man’s horses. The laws of England are at

my commandment. Blessed are they that have been

my friends, and woe to my Lord Chief Justice!

Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow. I

will make the King do you grace. I will leer upon

him as he comes by, and do but mark the countenance

that he will give me.

Come here, Pistol, stand behind me.—O, if I

had had time to have made new liveries, I would

have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of

you. But ’tis no matter. This poor show doth better.

This doth infer the zeal I had to see him.

It shows my earnestness of affection—

My devotion—

As it were, to ride day and night, and not to

deliberate, not to remember, not to have patience

to shift me—

But to stand stained with travel and sweating

with desire to see him, thinking of nothing else,

putting all affairs else in oblivion, as if there were

nothing else to be done but to see him.

I will deliver her.

God save thy Grace, King Hal, my royal Hal.

God save thee, my sweet boy!

My king, my Jove, I speak to thee, my heart!

Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound.

That can hardly be, Master Shallow. Do not

you grieve at this. I shall be sent for in private to

him. Look you, he must seem thus to the world.

Fear not your advancements. I will be the man yet

that shall make you great.

Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that

you heard was but a color.

Fear no colors. Go with me to dinner.—

Come, lieutenant Pistol.—Come, Bardolph.—I

shall be sent for soon at night.

My lord, my lord —

