


What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now

Should be the father of some stratagem.

The times are wild. Contention, like a horse

Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose

And bears down all before him.

Good, an God will!

How is this derived?

Saw you the field? Came you from Shrewsbury?

Here comes my servant Travers, who I sent

On Tuesday last to listen after news.

Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?

Ha? Again:

Said he young Harry Percy’s spur was cold?

Of Hotspur, Coldspur? That rebellion

Had met ill luck?

Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers

Give then such instances of loss?

Yea, this man’s brow, like to a title leaf,

Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.

So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood

Hath left a witnessed usurpation.—

Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?

How doth my son and brother?

Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek

Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand.

Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,

So dull, so dead in look, so woebegone,

Drew Priam’s curtain in the dead of night

And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;

But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,

And I my Percy’s death ere thou report’st it.

This thou wouldst say: “Your son did thus and thus;

Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas”—

Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds.

But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,

Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise,

Ending with “Brother, son, and all are dead.”

Why, he is dead.

See what a ready tongue suspicion hath!

He that but fears the thing he would not know

Hath, by instinct, knowledge from others’ eyes

That what he feared is chancèd. Yet speak, Morton.

Tell thou an earl his divination lies,

And I will take it as a sweet disgrace

And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.

Yet, for all this, say not that Percy’s dead.

I see a strange confession in thine eye.

Thou shak’st thy head and hold’st it fear or sin

To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so.

The tongue offends not that reports his death;

And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,

Not he which says the dead is not alive.

Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news

Hath but a losing office, and his tongue

Sounds ever after as a sullen bell

Remembered tolling a departing friend.

For this I shall have time enough to mourn.

In poison there is physic, and these news,

Having been well, that would have made me sick,

Being sick, have in some measure made me well.

And as the wretch whose fever-weakened joints,

Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life,

Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire

Out of his keeper’s arms, even so my limbs,

Weakened with grief, being now enraged with grief,

Are thrice themselves. Hence therefore, thou nice crutch.

A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel

Must glove this hand. And hence, thou sickly coif.

Thou art a guard too wanton for the head

Which princes, fleshed with conquest, aim to hit.

Now bind my brows with iron, and approach

The ragged’st hour that time and spite dare bring

To frown upon th’ enraged Northumberland.

Let heaven kiss Earth! Now let not Nature’s hand

Keep the wild flood confined. Let order die,

And let this world no longer be a stage

To feed contention in a lingering act;

But let one spirit of the firstborn Cain

Reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set

On bloody courses, the rude scene may end,

And darkness be the burier of the dead.

I knew of this before, but, to speak truth,

This present grief had wiped it from my mind.

Go in with me and counsel every man

The aptest way for safety and revenge.

Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed.

Never so few, and never yet more need.

I pray thee, loving wife and gentle daughter,

Give even way unto my rough affairs.

Put not you on the visage of the times

And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.

Alas, sweet wife, my honor is at pawn,

And, but my going, nothing can redeem it.

Beshrew your heart,

Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me

With new lamenting ancient oversights.

But I must go and meet with danger there,

Or it will seek me in another place

And find me worse provided.

Come, come, go in with me. ’Tis with my mind

As with the tide swelled up unto his height,

That makes a still-stand, running neither way.

Fain would I go to meet the Archbishop,

But many thousand reasons hold me back.

I will resolve for Scotland. There am I

Till time and vantage crave my company.

