


Health and fair greeting from our general,

The Prince Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.

Then, my lord,

Unto your Grace do I in chief address

The substance of my speech. If that rebellion

Came like itself, in base and abject routs,

Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rage,

And countenanced by boys and beggary—

I say, if damned commotion so appeared

In his true, native, and most proper shape,

You, reverend father, and these noble lords

Had not been here to dress the ugly form

Of base and bloody insurrection

With your fair honors. You, Lord Archbishop,

Whose see is by a civil peace maintained,

Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touched,

Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutored,

Whose white investments figure innocence,

The dove and very blessèd spirit of peace,

Wherefore do you so ill translate yourself

Out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace,

Into the harsh and boist’rous tongue of war,

Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,

Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine

To a loud trumpet and a point of war?

Whenever yet was your appeal denied?

Wherein have you been gallèd by the King?

What peer hath been suborned to grate on you,

That you should seal this lawless bloody book

Of forged rebellion with a seal divine

And consecrate commotion’s bitter edge?

There is no need of any such redress,

Or if there were, it not belongs to you.

O, my good Lord Mowbray,

Construe the times to their necessities,

And you shall say indeed it is the time,

And not the King, that doth you injuries.

Yet for your part, it not appears to me

Either from the King or in the present time

That you should have an inch of any ground

To build a grief on. Were you not restored

To all the Duke of Norfolk’s seigniories,

Your noble and right well remembered father’s?

You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what.

The Earl of Hereford was reputed then

In England the most valiant gentleman.

Who knows on whom fortune would then have smiled?

But if your father had been victor there,

He ne’er had borne it out of Coventry;

For all the country in a general voice

Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love

Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on

And blessed and graced, indeed more than the King.

But this is mere digression from my purpose.

Here come I from our princely general

To know your griefs, to tell you from his Grace

That he will give you audience; and wherein

It shall appear that your demands are just,

You shall enjoy them, everything set off

That might so much as think you enemies.

Mowbray, you overween to take it so.

This offer comes from mercy, not from fear.

For, lo, within a ken our army lies,

Upon mine honor, all too confident

To give admittance to a thought of fear.

Our battle is more full of names than yours,

Our men more perfect in the use of arms,

Our armor all as strong, our cause the best.

Then reason will our hearts should be as good.

Say you not then our offer is compelled.

That argues but the shame of your offense.

A rotten case abides no handling.

That is intended in the General’s name.

I muse you make so slight a question.

This will I show the General. Please you, lords,

In sight of both our battles we may meet,

And either end in peace, which God so frame,

Or to the place of difference call the swords

Which must decide it.

The Prince is here at hand. Pleaseth your Lordship

To meet his Grace just distance ’tween our armies.

Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly

How far forth you do like their articles.

I pledge your Grace, and if you knew what pains

I have bestowed to breed this present peace,

You would drink freely. But my love to you

Shall show itself more openly hereafter.

I am glad of it.—

Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.

Therefore be merry, coz, since sudden sorrow

Serves to say thus: “Some good thing comes tomorrow.”

The leaders, having charge from you to stand,

Will not go off until they hear you speak.

Good tidings, my Lord Hastings, for the which

I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason.—

And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,

Of capital treason I attach you both.

Is your assembly so?

Retreat is made and execution stayed.

Health to my sovereign, and new happiness

Added to that that I am to deliver.

Prince John your son doth kiss your Grace’s hand.

Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all

Are brought to the correction of your law.

There is not now a rebel’s sword unsheathed,

But peace puts forth her olive everywhere.

The manner how this action hath been borne

Here at more leisure may your Highness read

With every course in his particular.

My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.

