


Master Fang, have you entered the action?

Where’s your yeoman? Is ’t a lusty yeoman?

Will he stand to ’t?

O Lord, ay, good Master Snare.

Yea, good Master Snare, I have entered him

and all.

Alas the day, take heed of him. He stabbed me

in mine own house, and that most beastly, in good

faith. He cares not what mischief he does. If his

weapon be out, he will foin like any devil. He will

spare neither man, woman, nor child.

No, nor I neither. I’ll be at your elbow.

I am undone by his going. I warrant you, he’s

an infinitive thing upon my score. Good Master

Fang, hold him sure. Good Master Snare, let him

not ’scape. He comes continuantly to Pie Corner,

saving your manhoods, to buy a saddle, and he is

indited to dinner to the Lubber’s Head in Lumbert

Street, to Master Smooth’s the silkman. I pray you,

since my exion is entered, and my case so openly

known to the world, let him be brought in to his

answer. A hundred mark is a long one for a poor

lone woman to bear, and I have borne, and borne,

and borne, and have been fubbed off, and fubbed

off, and fubbed off from this day to that day, that it is

a shame to be thought on. There is no honesty in

such dealing, unless a woman should be made an

ass and a beast to bear every knave’s wrong. Yonder

he comes, and that arrant malmsey-nose knave,

Bardolph, with him. Do your offices, do your offices,

Master Fang and Master Snare, do me, do me,

do me your offices.

Throw me in the channel? I’ll throw thee in

the channel. Wilt thou, wilt thou, thou bastardly

rogue?—Murder, murder!—Ah, thou honeysuckle

villain, wilt thou kill God’s officers and the King’s?

Ah, thou honeyseed rogue, thou art a honeyseed, a

man-queller, and a woman-queller.

Good people, bring a rescue or two.—Thou

wot, wot thou? Thou wot, wot ta? Do, do, thou

rogue. Do, thou hempseed.

Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you

stand to me.

O my most worshipful lord, an ’t please your

Grace, I am a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is

arrested at my suit.

It is more than for some, my lord; it is for all I

have. He hath eaten me out of house and home. He

hath put all my substance into that fat belly of his.

But I will have some of it out again, or I

will ride thee o’ nights like the mare.

Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself

and the money too. Thou didst swear to me upon a

parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my Dolphin chamber at

the round table by a sea-coal fire, upon Wednesday

in Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thy head

for liking his father to a singing-man of Windsor,

thou didst swear to me then, as I was washing thy

wound, to marry me and make me my lady thy wife.

Canst thou deny it? Did not Goodwife Keech, the

butcher’s wife, come in then and call me Gossip

Quickly, coming in to borrow a mess of vinegar,

telling us she had a good dish of prawns, whereby

thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told thee

they were ill for a green wound? And didst thou not,

when she was gone downstairs, desire me to be no

more so familiarity with such poor people, saying

that ere long they should call me madam? And didst

thou not kiss me and bid me fetch thee thirty

shillings? I put thee now to thy book-oath. Deny it if

thou canst.

Yea, in truth, my lord.

Faith, you said so before.

By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be

fain to pawn both my plate and the tapestry of my

dining chambers.

Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty

nobles. I’ faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so God

save me, la.

Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my

gown. I hope you’ll come to supper. You’ll pay

me all together?

Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at

supper?

I’ faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in

an excellent good temperality. Your pulsidge beats

as extraordinarily as heart would desire, and your

color, I warrant you, is as red as any rose, in good

truth, la. But, i’ faith, you have drunk too much

canaries, and that’s a marvellous searching wine,

and it perfumes the blood ere one can say “What’s

this?” How do you now?

Why, that’s well said. A good heart’s worth

gold. Lo, here comes Sir John.

Sick of a calm, yea, good faith.

By my troth, this is the old fashion. You two

never meet but you fall to some discord. You are

both, i’ good truth, as rheumatic as two dry toasts.

You cannot one bear with another’s confirmities.

What the good-year! One must bear, and

that must be you. You are the weaker vessel, as they

say, the emptier vessel.

If he swagger, let him not come here. No, by

my faith, I must live among my neighbors. I’ll no

swaggerers. I am in good name and fame with the

very best. Shut the door. There comes no swaggerers

here. I have not lived all this while to have

swaggering now. Shut the door, I pray you.

Pray you pacify yourself, Sir John. There

comes no swaggerers here.

Tilly-vally, Sir John, ne’er tell me. And your

ancient swaggerer comes not in my doors. I was

before Master Tisick the debuty t’ other day, and, as

he said to me—’twas no longer ago than Wednesday

last, i’ good faith—“Neighbor Quickly,” says

he—Master Dumb, our minister, was by then—

“Neighbor Quickly,” says he, “receive those that

are civil, for,” said he, “you are in an ill name.”

Now he said so, I can tell whereupon. “For,” says

he, “you are an honest woman, and well thought

on. Therefore take heed what guests you receive.

Receive,” says he, “no swaggering companions.”

There comes none here. You would bless you to

hear what he said. No, I’ll no swaggerers.

“Cheater” call you him? I will bar no honest

man my house, nor no cheater, but I do not love

swaggering. By my troth, I am the worse when one

says “swagger.” Feel, masters, how I shake; look

you, I warrant you.

Do I? Yea, in very truth, do I, an ’twere an

aspen leaf. I cannot abide swaggerers.

Come, I’ll drink no proofs nor no bullets. I’ll

drink no more than will do me good, for no man’s

pleasure, I.

No, good Captain Pistol, not here, sweet

captain!

Good Captain Peesell, be quiet. ’Tis very late,

i’ faith. I beseek you now, aggravate your choler.

By my troth, captain, these are very bitter

words.

O’ my word, captain, there’s none such here.

What the good-year, do you think I would deny her?

For God’s sake, be quiet.

Here’s goodly stuff toward!

Here’s a goodly tumult. I’ll forswear keeping

house afore I’ll be in these tirrits and frights. So,

murder, I warrant now. Alas, alas, put up your

naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.

Are you not hurt i’ th’ groin?

Methought he made a shrewd thrust at your belly.

O, the Lord preserve thy good Grace! By my

troth, welcome to London. Now the Lord bless that

sweet face of thine. O Jesu, are you come from

Wales?

God’s blessing of your good heart, and so she

is, by my troth.

No, I warrant you.

All vitlars do so. What’s a joint of mutton or

two in a whole Lent?

Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th’ door

there, Francis.

Well, fare thee well. I have known thee these

twenty-nine years, come peasecod time, but an

honester and truer-hearted man—well, fare thee

well.

What’s the matter?

O, run, Doll, run, run, good Doll. Come.—

She comes blubbered.—Yea! Will you come, Doll?

No, thou arrant knave. I would to God that I

might die, that I might have thee hanged. Thou hast

drawn my shoulder out of joint.

O the Lord, that Sir John were come! I would

make this a bloody day to somebody. But I pray God

the fruit of her womb might miscarry.

O God, that right should thus overcome

might! Well, of sufferance comes ease.

Ay, come, you starved bloodhound.

Thou atomy, thou!

