


Many good morrows to your Majesty.

’Tis one o’clock, and past.

We have, my liege.

It is but as a body yet distempered,

Which to his former strength may be restored

With good advice and little medicine.

My Lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.

There is a history in all men’s lives

Figuring the natures of the times deceased,

The which observed, a man may prophesy,

With a near aim, of the main chance of things

As yet not come to life, who in their seeds

And weak beginning lie intreasurèd.

Such things become the hatch and brood of time,

And by the necessary form of this,

King Richard might create a perfect guess

That great Northumberland, then false to him,

Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness,

Which should not find a ground to root upon

Unless on you.

It cannot be, my lord.

Rumor doth double, like the voice and echo,

The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace

To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord,

The powers that you already have sent forth

Shall bring this prize in very easily.

To comfort you the more, I have received

A certain instance that Glendower is dead.

Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill,

And these unseasoned hours perforce must add

Unto your sickness.

Both which we doubt not but your Majesty

Shall soon enjoy.

My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite.

The Prince but studies his companions

Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language,

’Tis needful that the most immodest word

Be looked upon and learned; which, once attained,

Your Highness knows, comes to no further use

But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms,

The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,

Cast off his followers, and their memory

Shall as a pattern or a measure live,

By which his Grace must mete the lives of others,

Turning past evils to advantages.

Be patient, princes. You do know these fits

Are with his Highness very ordinary.

Stand from him, give him air. He’ll straight be well.

Speak lower, princes, for the King recovers.

Call for the music in the other room.

Less noise, less noise.

Not so much noise, my lords.—Sweet prince, speak low.

The King your father is disposed to sleep.

Will ’t please your Grace to go along with us?

What would your Majesty? How fares your Grace?

This door is open. He is gone this way.

When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.

My lord, I found the Prince in the next room,

Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,

With such a deep demeanor in great sorrow

That tyranny, which never quaffed but blood,

Would, by beholding him, have washed his knife

With gentle eyedrops. He is coming hither.

’Tis called Jerusalem, my noble lord.

How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whither away?

Exceeding well. His cares are now all ended.

He’s walked the way of nature,

And to our purposes he lives no more.

Indeed, I think the young king loves you not.

Here come the heavy issue of dead Harry.

O, that the living Harry had the temper

Of he the worst of these three gentlemen!

How many nobles then should hold their places

That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!

We do remember, but our argument

Is all too heavy to admit much talk.

Here comes the Prince.

