


God save you, Sir John.

I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two

bullets.

Then, to you, Mistress Dorothy! I will charge

you.

I know you, Mistress Dorothy.

God let me not live but I will murder your ruff

for this.

Not I. I tell thee what, Corporal

Bardolph, I could tear her. I’ll be revenged of her.

I’ll see her damned first to Pluto’s damnèd

lake, by this hand, to th’ infernal deep with Erebus

and tortures vile also. Hold hook and line, say I.

Down, down, dogs! Down, Fates! Have we not

Hiren here?

These be good humors indeed. Shall pack-horses

and hollow pampered jades of Asia, which

cannot go but thirty mile a day, compare with

Caesars and with cannibals and Troyant Greeks?

Nay, rather damn them with King Cerberus, and let

the welkin roar. Shall we fall foul for toys?

Die men like dogs! Give crowns like pins! Have

we not Hiren here?

Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis. Come,

give ’s some sack. Si fortune me tormente, sperato

me contento. Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend

give fire. Give me some sack, and, sweetheart, lie

thou there. Come we to

full points here? And are etceteras nothings?

Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf. What, we have

seen the seven stars.

“Thrust him downstairs”? Know we not Galloway

nags?

What, shall we have

incision? Shall we imbrue? Then death rock me

asleep, abridge my doleful days. Why then, let

grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds untwind the Sisters

Three. Come, Atropos, I say.

Sir John, God save you.

Not the ill wind which blows no man to good.

Sweet knight, thou art now one of the greatest men

in this realm.

Puff?

Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base!—

Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend,

And helter-skelter have I rode to thee,

And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys,

And golden times, and happy news of price.

A foutre for the world and worldlings base!

I speak of Africa and golden joys.

Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons,

And shall good news be baffled?

Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies’ lap.

Why then, lament therefor.

Under which king, besonian? Speak or die.

Harry the Fourth, or Fifth?

A foutre for thine office!—

Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is king.

Harry the Fifth’s the man. I speak the truth.

When Pistol lies, do this and fig me, like

The bragging Spaniard.

As nail in door. The things I speak are just.

What, I do bring good news!

Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!

“Where is the life that late I led?” say they.

Why, here it is. Welcome these pleasant days.

God bless thy lungs, good knight!

’Tis semper idem, for obsque hoc nihil est; ’tis

all in every part.

My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver, and

make thee rage. Thy Doll and Helen of thy noble

thoughts is in base durance and contagious prison,

haled thither by most mechanical and dirty hand.

Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto’s

snake, for Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.

There roared the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.

The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!

Si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta.

