


Long live Queen Margaret, England’s happiness!

Now, by the death of Him that died for all,

These counties were the keys of Normandy.

But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?

Pride went before; Ambition follows him.

While these do labor for their own preferment,

Behooves it us to labor for the realm.

I never saw but Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester,

Did bear him like a noble gentleman.

Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal,

More like a soldier than a man o’ th’ Church,

As stout and proud as he were lord of all,

Swear like a ruffian and demean himself

Unlike the ruler of a commonweal.—

Warwick, my son, the comfort of my age,

Thy deeds, thy plainness, and thy housekeeping

Hath won the greatest favor of the Commons,

Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey.—

And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland,

In bringing them to civil discipline,

Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,

When thou wert regent for our sovereign,

Have made thee feared and honored of the people.

Join we together for the public good

In what we can to bridle and suppress

The pride of Suffolk and the Cardinal,

With Somerset’s and Buckingham’s ambition;

And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey’s deeds

While they do tend the profit of the land.

Then let’s make haste away and look unto the main.

Peace, son.—And show some reason, Buckingham,

Why Somerset should be preferred in this.

My lord, I long to hear it at full.

But William of Hatfield died without an heir.

This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,

As I have read, laid claim unto the crown

And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,

Who kept him in captivity till he died.

But to the rest.

Long live our sovereign Richard, England’s king!

My lord, break we off. We know your mind at full.

Come, leave your drinking, and fall to

blows. Sirrah, what’s thy name?

Peter? What more?

Thump? Then see thou thump thy master

well.

Sirs, stand apart. The King shall know your mind.—

Dread lord, the Commons send you word by me,

Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death

Or banishèd fair England’s territories,

They will by violence tear him from your palace

And torture him with grievous ling’ring death.

They say, by him the good duke Humphrey died;

They say, in him they fear your Highness’ death;

And mere instinct of love and loyalty,

Free from a stubborn opposite intent,

As being thought to contradict your liking,

Makes them thus forward in his banishment.

They say, in care of your most royal person,

That if your Highness should intend to sleep,

And charge that no man should disturb your rest,

In pain of your dislike or pain of death,

Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,

Were there a serpent seen with forkèd tongue

That slyly glided towards your Majesty,

It were but necessary you were waked,

Lest, being suffered in that harmful slumber,

The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal.

And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,

That they will guard you, whe’er you will or no,

From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is,

With whose envenomèd and fatal sting

Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,

They say, is shamefully bereft of life.

Disturb him not. Let him pass peaceably.

My lord, I have considered with myself

The title of this most renownèd duke,

And in my conscience do repute his Grace

The rightful heir to England’s royal seat.

I have.

It is great sin to swear unto a sin,

But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.

Who can be bound by any solemn vow

To do a murd’rous deed, to rob a man,

To force a spotless virgin’s chastity,

To reave the orphan of his patrimony,

To wring the widow from her customed right,

And have no other reason for this wrong

But that he was bound by a solemn oath?

By th’ Mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard.

God knows how long it is I have to live,

And it hath pleased Him that three times today

You have defended me from imminent death.

Well, lords, we have not got that which we have;

’Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,

Being opposites of such repairing nature.

