


We, John Cade, so termed of our supposed

father—

For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired

with the spirit of putting down kings and princes—

command silence.

My father was a Mortimer—

My mother a Plantagenet—

My wife descended of the Lacys.

Therefore am I of an honorable house.

Valiant I am—

I am able to endure much—

I fear neither sword nor fire.

Be brave, then, for your captain is brave and

vows reformation. There shall be in England seven

halfpenny loaves sold for a penny. The three-hooped

pot shall have ten hoops, and I will make it

felony to drink small beer. All the realm shall be in

common, and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to

grass. And when I am king, as king I will be—

I thank you, good people.—There shall be no

money; all shall eat and drink on my score; and I

will apparel them all in one livery, that they may

agree like brothers and worship me their lord.

Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable

thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb should

be made parchment? That parchment, being scribbled

o’er, should undo a man? Some say the bee

stings, but I say, ’tis the beeswax; for I did but seal

once to a thing, and I was never mine own man

since. How now? Who’s there?

O, monstrous!

Here’s a villain!

Nay, then, he is a conjurer.

I am sorry for ’t. The man is a proper man, of

mine honor. Unless I find him guilty, he shall not

die.—Come hither, sirrah; I must examine thee.

What is thy name?

Let me alone.—Dost thou use to write thy

name? Or hast thou a mark to thyself, like an

honest, plain-dealing man?

Away with him, I say! Hang him with his pen

and inkhorn about his neck.

Here I am, thou particular fellow.

Stand, villain, stand, or I’ll fell thee down. He

shall be encountered with a man as good as himself.

He is but a knight, is he?

To equal him I will make myself a knight

presently. Rise up Sir John Mortimer.

Now have at him!

As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not.

It is to you, good people, that I speak,

Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign,

For I am rightful heir unto the crown.

And Adam was a gardener.

Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,

Married the Duke of Clarence’ daughter, did he not?

By her he had two children at one birth.

Ay, there’s the question. But I say ’tis true.

The elder of them, being put to nurse,

Was by a beggar-woman stol’n away,

And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,

Became a bricklayer when he came to age.

His son am I. Deny it if you can.

He lies, for I invented it myself.—Go to,

sirrah. Tell the King from me that, for his father’s

sake, Henry the Fifth, in whose time boys went to

span-counter for French crowns, I am content he

shall reign, but I’ll be Protector over him.

And good reason: for thereby is England mained

and fain to go with a staff, but that my puissance

holds it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord

Saye hath gelded the commonwealth and made it

an eunuch; and, more than that, he can speak

French, and therefore he is a traitor.

Nay, answer if you can. The Frenchmen are our

enemies. Go to, then, I ask but this: can he that

speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good

counselor, or no?

And you that love the Commons, follow me.

Now show yourselves men. ’Tis for liberty!

We will not leave one lord, one gentleman;

Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon,

For they are thrifty, honest men and such

As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.

But then are we in order when we are most out

of order. Come, march forward.

Where’s Dick, the butcher of Ashford?

They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and

thou behaved’st thyself as if thou hadst been in

thine own slaughterhouse. Therefore, thus will I

reward thee: the Lent shall be as long again as it is,

and thou shalt have a license to kill for a hundred

lacking one.

And to speak truth, thou deserv’st no less. This

monument of the victory will I bear.

And the bodies shall be dragged at my horse

heels till I do come to London, where we will have

the Mayor’s sword borne before us.

Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let’s march

towards London.

Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting

upon London Stone, I charge and command

that, of the city’s cost, the Pissing Conduit run

nothing but claret wine this first year of our reign.

And now henceforward it shall be treason for any

that calls me other than Lord Mortimer.

Knock him down there.

Come, then, let’s go fight with them. But first, go

and set London Bridge on fire, and, if you can,

burn down the Tower too. Come, let’s away.

So, sirs. Now go some and pull down the Savoy;

others to th’ Inns of Court. Down with them all!

Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.

I have thought upon it; it shall be so. Away!

Burn all the records of the realm. My mouth shall

be the Parliament of England.

And henceforward all things shall be in

common.

Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times.—Ah,

thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord, now

art thou within point-blank of our jurisdiction

regal. What canst thou answer to my Majesty for

giving up of Normandy unto Monsieur Basimecu,

the Dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by

these presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer,

that I am the besom that must sweep the

court clean of such filth as thou art. Thou hast

most traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm

in erecting a grammar school; and whereas,

before, our forefathers had no other books but the

score and the tally, thou hast caused printing to be

used, and, contrary to the King his crown and dignity,

thou hast built a paper mill. It will be proved

to thy face that thou hast men about thee that usually

talk of a noun and a verb and such abominable

words as no Christian ear can endure to hear.

Thou hast appointed justices of peace to call poor

men before them about matters they were not able

to answer. Moreover, thou hast put them in prison;

and, because they could not read, thou hast

hanged them, when indeed only for that cause

they have been most worthy to live. Thou dost ride

on a footcloth, dost thou not?

Marry, thou oughtst not to let thy horse wear a

cloak when honester men than thou go in their

hose and doublets.

Away with him, away with him! He speaks

Latin.

Tut, when struck’st thou one blow in the field?

Give him a box o’ th’ ear, and that will make ’em

red again.

You shall have a hempen caudle, then, and

the help of hatchet.

Nay, he nods at us, as who should say “I’ll be

even with you.” I’ll see if his head will stand steadier

on a pole, or no. Take him away, and behead

him.

I feel remorse in myself with his words, but I’ll

bridle it. He shall die, an it be but for pleading so

well for his life. Away with him! He has a familiar

under his tongue; he speaks not i’ God’s name. Go,

take him away, I say, and strike off his head

presently; and then break into his son-in-law’s

house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head;

and bring them both upon two poles hither.

Away with him, and do as I command you.

The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a

head on his shoulders unless he pay me tribute.

There shall not a maid be married but she shall

pay to me her maidenhead ere they have it. Men

shall hold of me in capite; and we charge and command

that their wives be as free as heart can wish

or tongue can tell.

Marry, presently.

But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another,

for they loved well when they were alive.

Now part them again,

lest they consult about the giving up of some more

towns in France. Soldiers, defer the spoil of the

city until night, for, with these borne before us

instead of maces, will we ride through the streets

and at every corner have them kiss. Away!

Up Fish Street! Down Saint Magnus’ Corner!

Kill and knock down! Throw them into Thames!

What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to

sound retreat or parley when I command them

kill?

What, Buckingham and Clifford, are you so

brave?—And, you base peasants, do you believe

him? Will you needs be hanged with your pardons

about your necks? Hath my sword therefore broke

through London gates, that you should leave me at

the White Hart in Southwark? I thought you

would never have given out these arms till you had

recovered your ancient freedom. But you are all

recreants and dastards, and delight to live in slavery

to the nobility. Let them break your backs with

burdens, take your houses over your heads, ravish

your wives and daughters before your faces. For

me, I will make shift for one, and so God’s curse

light upon you all!

Was ever feather so lightly blown to and

fro as this multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth

hales them to an hundred mischiefs and makes

them leave me desolate. I see them lay their heads

together to surprise me. My sword make way for

me, for here is no staying!—In despite of the devils

and hell, have through the very middest of you!

And heavens and honor be witness that no want of

resolution in me, but only my followers’ base and

ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my

heels.

Fie on ambitions! Fie on myself, that have a

sword and yet am ready to famish! These five days

have I hid me in these woods and durst not peep

out, for all the country is laid for me. But now am

I so hungry that, if I might have a lease of my life

for a thousand years, I could stay no longer.

Wherefore, o’er a brick wall have I climbed into

this garden, to see if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet

another while, which is not amiss to cool a man’s

stomach this hot weather. And I think this word

sallet was born to do me good; for many a time,

but for a sallet, my brainpan had been cleft with a

brown bill; and many a time, when I have been dry

and bravely marching, it hath served me instead of

a quart pot to drink in; and now the word sallet

must serve me to feed on.

Here’s the lord of the soil come to seize

me for a stray, for entering his fee-simple without

leave.—Ah, villain, thou wilt betray me and get a

thousand crowns of the King by carrying my head

to him; but I’ll make thee eat iron like an ostrich

and swallow my sword like a great pin, ere thou

and I part.

Brave thee? Ay, by the best blood that ever was

broached, and beard thee too. Look on me well: I

have eat no meat these five days, yet come thou

and thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as

dead as a doornail, I pray God I may never eat

grass more.

By my valor, the most complete champion that

ever I heard! Steel, if thou turn the edge or cut not

out the burly-boned clown in chines of beef ere

thou sleep in thy sheath, I beseech God on my

knees thou mayst be turned to hobnails.

O, I am slain! Famine, and no other, hath slain me.

Let ten thousand devils come against me, and give

me but the ten meals I have lost, and I’d defy them

all. Wither, garden, and be henceforth a burying

place to all that do dwell in this house, because the

unconquered soul of Cade is fled.

Iden, farewell, and be proud of thy victory. Tell

Kent from me she hath lost her best man, and

exhort all the world to be cowards; for I, that never

feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valor.

