


But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,

And that thy summer bred us no increase,

We set the axe to thy usurping root;

And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,

Yet know thou, since we have begun to strike,

We’ll never leave till we have hewn thee down

Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.

Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;

Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us.

What counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?

Yet let us all together to our troops

And give them leave to fly that will not stay,

And call them pillars that will stand to us;

And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards

As victors wear at the Olympian Games.

This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,

For yet is hope of life and victory.

Forslow no longer; make we hence amain.

If so thou think’st, vex him with eager words.

While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.

Where’s Captain Margaret to fence you now?

He knows the game; how true he keeps the wind!

I fear her not, unless she chance to fall.

I think he means to beg a child of her.

As red as fire! Nay, then, her wax must melt.

He is the bluntest wooer in Christendom.

When he was made a shriver, ’twas for shift.

To who, my lord?

That’s a day longer than a wonder lasts.

Alas, you know ’tis far from hence to France.

How could he stay till Warwick made return?

I mind to tell him plainly what I think.

As well as Lewis of France or the Earl of Warwick,

Which are so weak of courage and in judgment

That they’ll take no offense at our abuse.

Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis

Becomes your enemy for mocking him

About the marriage of the Lady Bona.

For this one speech, Lord Hastings well deserves

To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.

Or else you would not have bestowed the heir

Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife’s son,

And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.

In choosing for yourself you showed your judgment,

Which, being shallow, you shall give me leave

To play the broker in mine own behalf.

And to that end, I shortly mind to leave you.

Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.—

Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,

For I will hence to Warwick’s other daughter,

That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage

I may not prove inferior to yourself.

You that love me and Warwick, follow me.

Fear not that, my lord.

No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,

To whom the heav’ns in thy nativity

Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown

As likely to be blest in peace and war;

And therefore I yield thee my free consent.

That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,

For on thy fortune I repose myself.

What else? And that succession be determinèd.

It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.

A little fire is quickly trodden out,

Which, being suffered, rivers cannot quench.

In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness’ hand.

Father of Warwick, know you what this means?

Look, here I throw my infamy at thee.

I will not ruinate my father’s house,

Who gave his blood to lime the stones together

And set up Lancaster. Why, trowest thou, Warwick,

That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,

To bend the fatal instruments of war

Against his brother and his lawful king?

Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath.

To keep that oath were more impiety

Than Jephthah when he sacrificed his daughter.

I am so sorry for my trespass made

That, to deserve well at my brother’s hands,

I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,

With resolution, wheresoe’er I meet thee—

As I will meet thee if thou stir abroad—

To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.

And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee

And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.—

Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends.—

And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,

For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

A little gale will soon disperse that cloud

And blow it to the source from whence it came;

Thy very beams will dry those vapors up,

For every cloud engenders not a storm.

Untutored lad, thou art too malapert.

And there’s for twitting me with perjury.

What? What?

By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.

Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?

To London all in post, and, as I guess,

To make a bloody supper in the Tower.

The duty that I owe unto your Majesty

I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.

What will your Grace have done with Margaret?

Reignier, her father, to the King of France

Hath pawned the Sicils and Jerusalem,

And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

