


Nay, go not from me. I will follow thee.

Who can be patient in such extremes?

Ah, wretched man, would I had died a maid

And never seen thee, never borne thee son,

Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father.

Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?

Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,

Or felt that pain which I did for him once,

Or nourished him as I did with my blood,

Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there,

Rather than have made that savage duke thine heir

And disinherited thine only son.

Enforced thee? Art thou king and wilt be forced?

I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch,

Thou hast undone thyself, thy son, and me,

And giv’n unto the house of York such head

As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance!

To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,

What is it but to make thy sepulcher

And creep into it far before thy time?

Warwick is Chancellor and the lord of Callice;

Stern Falconbridge commands the Narrow Seas;

The Duke is made Protector of the realm;

And yet shalt thou be safe? Such safety finds

The trembling lamb environèd with wolves.

Had I been there, which am a silly woman,

The soldiers should have tossed me on their pikes

Before I would have granted to that act.

But thou preferr’st thy life before thine honor.

And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself

Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,

Until that act of Parliament be repealed

Whereby my son is disinherited.

The northern lords that have forsworn thy colors

Will follow mine if once they see them spread;

And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace

And utter ruin of the house of York.

Thus do I leave thee.—Come, son, let’s away.

Our army is ready. Come, we’ll after them.

Thou hast spoke too much already. Get thee gone.

Ay, to be murdered by his enemies!

Come, son, away. We may not linger thus.

Hold, valiant Clifford, for a thousand causes

I would prolong a while the traitor’s life.—

Wrath makes him deaf; speak thou, Northumberland.

Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,

Come, make him stand upon this molehill here

That raught at mountains with outstretchèd arms,

Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.

What, was it you that would be England’s king?

Was ’t you that reveled in our parliament

And made a preachment of your high descent?

Where are your mess of sons to back you now,

The wanton Edward and the lusty George?

And where’s that valiant crookback prodigy,

Dickie, your boy, that with his grumbling voice

Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?

Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?

Look, York, I stained this napkin with the blood

That valiant Clifford with his rapier’s point

Made issue from the bosom of the boy;

And if thine eyes can water for his death,

I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.

Alas, poor York, but that I hate thee deadly

I should lament thy miserable state.

I prithee grieve to make me merry, York.

What, hath thy fiery heart so parched thine entrails

That not a tear can fall for Rutland’s death?

Why art thou patient, man? Thou shouldst be mad;

And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.

Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.

Thou would’st be fee’d, I see, to make me sport.—

York cannot speak unless he wear a crown.

A crown for York! And, lords, bow low to him.

Hold you his hands whilst I do set it on.

Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king.

Ay, this is he that took King Henry’s chair,

And this is he was his adopted heir.

But how is it that great Plantagenet

Is crowned so soon and broke his solemn oath?—

As I bethink me, you should not be king

Till our King Henry had shook hands with Death.

And will you pale your head in Henry’s glory

And rob his temples of the diadem

Now, in his life, against your holy oath?

O, ’tis a fault too too unpardonable.

Off with the crown and, with the crown, his head;

And whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.

Nay, stay, let’s hear the orisons he makes.

What, weeping ripe, my Lord Northumberland?

Think but upon the wrong he did us all,

And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.

And here’s to right our gentle-hearted king.

Off with his head, and set it on York gates,

So York may overlook the town of York.

Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.

Yonder’s the head of that arch-enemy

That sought to be encompassed with your crown.

Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?

My lord, cheer up your spirits; our foes are nigh,

And this soft courage makes your followers faint.

You promised knighthood to our forward son.

Unsheathe your sword and dub him presently.—

Edward, kneel down.

Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.

Go rate thy minions, proud insulting boy.

Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms

Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?

Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick, dare you speak?

When you and I met at Saint Albans last,

Your legs did better service than your hands.

Defy them, then, or else hold close thy lips.

But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam,

But like a foul misshapen stigmatic,

Marked by the Destinies to be avoided,

As venom toads or lizards’ dreadful stings.

Stay, Edward!

Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain.

Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds

Having the fearful flying hare in sight,

With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath

And bloody steel grasped in their ireful hands,

Are at our backs, and therefore hence amain.

No, mighty King of France. Now Margaret

Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve

Where kings command. I was, I must confess,

Great Albion’s queen in former golden days,

But now mischance hath trod my title down

And with dishonor laid me on the ground,

Where I must take like seat unto my fortune

And to my humble seat conform myself.

From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears

And stops my tongue, while heart is drowned in cares.

Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts

And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.

Now therefore be it known to noble Lewis

That Henry, sole possessor of my love,

Is, of a king, become a banished man

And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;

While proud ambitious Edward, Duke of York,

Usurps the regal title and the seat

Of England’s true-anointed lawful king.

This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,

With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry’s heir,

Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;

And if thou fail us, all our hope is done.

Scotland hath will to help but cannot help;

Our people and our peers are both misled,

Our treasure seized, our soldiers put to flight,

And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.

The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.

O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.

And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow.

Our Earl of Warwick, Edward’s greatest friend.

Ay, now begins a second storm to rise,

For this is he that moves both wind and tide.

If that go forward, Henry’s hope is done.

King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak

Before you answer Warwick. His demand

Springs not from Edward’s well-meant honest love,

But from deceit, bred by necessity;

For how can tyrants safely govern home

Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?

To prove him tyrant, this reason may suffice:

That Henry liveth still; but were he dead,

Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry’s son.

Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage

Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonor;

For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,

Yet heav’ns are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.

Heavens grant that Warwick’s words bewitch him not.

Deceitful Warwick, it was thy device

By this alliance to make void my suit.

Before thy coming, Lewis was Henry’s friend.

Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick,

Proud setter-up and puller-down of kings!

I will not hence till with my talk and tears,

Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold

Thy sly conveyance and thy lord’s false love,

For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.

Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.

I told your Majesty as much before.

This proveth Edward’s love and Warwick’s honesty.

Warwick, these words have turned my hate to love,

And I forgive and quite forget old faults,

And joy that thou becom’st King Henry’s friend.

Renownèd prince, how shall poor Henry live

Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?

Let me give humble thanks for all, at once.

Tell him my mourning weeds are laid aside

And I am ready to put armor on.

Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.

Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous.

Therefore, delay not; give thy hand to Warwick,

And with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,

That only Warwick’s daughter shall be thine.

Great lords, wise men ne’er sit and wail their loss

But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.

What though the mast be now blown overboard,

The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,

And half our sailors swallowed in the flood?

Yet lives our pilot still. Is ’t meet that he

Should leave the helm and, like a fearful lad,

With tearful eyes add water to the sea

And give more strength to that which hath too much,

Whiles in his moan the ship splits on the rock,

Which industry and courage might have saved?

Ah, what a shame, ah, what a fault were this!

Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?

And Montague our topmast; what of him?

Our slaughtered friends the tackles; what of these?

Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?

And Somerset another goodly mast?

The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?

And, though unskillful, why not Ned and I

For once allowed the skillful pilot’s charge?

We will not from the helm to sit and weep,

But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,

From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wrack.

As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.

And what is Edward but a ruthless sea?

What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?

And Richard but a ragged fatal rock—

All these the enemies to our poor bark?

Say you can swim: alas, ’tis but awhile;

Tread on the sand: why, there you quickly sink;

Bestride the rock: the tide will wash you off

Or else you famish; that’s a threefold death.

This speak I, lords, to let you understand,

If case some one of you would fly from us,

That there’s no hoped-for mercy with the brothers

More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.

Why, courage then! What cannot be avoided

’Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.

Thanks, gentle Somerset.—Sweet Oxford, thanks.

This cheers my heart to see your forwardness.

Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say

My tears gainsay, for every word I speak

You see I drink the water of my eye.

Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,

Is prisoner to the foe, his state usurped,

His realm a slaughterhouse, his subjects slain,

His statutes cancelled and his treasure spent,

And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.

You fight in justice. Then, in God’s name, lords,

Be valiant, and give signal to the fight!

So part we sadly in this troublous world

To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.

Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!

Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.

O, kill me too!

O Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy mother, boy.

Canst thou not speak? O traitors, murderers!

They that stabbed Caesar shed no blood at all,

Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,

If this foul deed were by to equal it.

He was a man; this, in respect, a child,

And men ne’er spend their fury on a child.

What’s worse than murderer, that I may name it?

No, no, my heart will burst an if I speak,

And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.

Butchers and villains, bloody cannibals,

How sweet a plant have you untimely cropped!

You have no children, butchers. If you had,

The thought of them would have stirred up remorse.

But if you ever chance to have a child,

Look in his youth to have him so cut off

As, deathsmen, you have rid this sweet young prince.

Nay, never bear me hence! Dispatch me here.

Here sheathe thy sword; I’ll pardon thee my death.

What, wilt thou not?—Then, Clarence, do it thou.

Good Clarence, do! Sweet Clarence, do thou do it.

Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself.

’Twas sin before, but now ’tis charity.

What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil’s butcher, Richard,

Hard-favored Richard? Richard, where art thou?

Thou art not here. Murder is thy alms-deed;

Petitioners for blood thou ne’er putt’st back.

So come to you and yours as to this prince!

