


Lord Stafford’s father, Duke of Buckingham,

Is either slain or wounded dangerous.

I cleft his beaver with a downright blow.

That this is true, father, behold his blood.

Sweet father, do so. Set it on your head.

No, I can better play the orator.

No quarrel, but a slight contention.

Now you are heir; therefore enjoy it now.

By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,

It will outrun you, father, in the end.

But for a kingdom any oath may be broken.

I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.

I hear their drums. Let’s set our men in order,

And issue forth and bid them battle straight.

I wonder how our princely father scaped,

Or whether he be scaped away or no

From Clifford’s and Northumberland’s pursuit.

Had he been ta’en, we should have heard the news;

Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;

Or had he scaped, methinks we should have heard

The happy tidings of his good escape.

How fares my brother? Why is he so sad?

Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?

’Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.

I think it cites us, brother, to the field,

That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,

Each one already blazing by our meeds,

Should notwithstanding join our lights together

And overshine the earth, as this the world.

Whate’er it bodes, henceforward will I bear

Upon my target three fair shining suns.

O, speak no more, for I have heard too much!

Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,

Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.

O Clifford, boist’rous Clifford, thou hast slain

The flower of Europe for his chivalry;

And treacherously hast thou vanquished him,

For hand to hand he would have vanquished thee.

Now my soul’s palace is become a prison;

Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body

Might in the ground be closèd up in rest,

For never henceforth shall I joy again.

Never, O never, shall I see more joy!

His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;

His dukedom and his chair with me is left.

O Warwick, Warwick, that Plantagenet

Which held thee dearly as his soul’s redemption

Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.

Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?

And when came George from Burgundy to England?

Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean,

And when thou fail’st—as God forbid the hour!—

Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend.

Then strike up drums! God and Saint George for us!

Now, perjured Henry, wilt thou kneel for grace

And set thy diadem upon my head,

Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?

I am his king, and he should bow his knee.

I was adopted heir by his consent.

Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,

You that are king, though he do wear the crown,

Have caused him, by new act of Parliament,

To blot out me and put his own son in.

Say, Henry, shall I have my right or no?

A thousand men have broke their fasts today

That ne’er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.

A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns

To make this shameless callet know herself.—

Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,

Although thy husband may be Menelaus;

And ne’er was Agamemnon’s brother wronged

By that false woman as this king by thee.

His father reveled in the heart of France,

And tamed the King, and made the Dauphin stoop;

And had he matched according to his state,

He might have kept that glory to this day.

But when he took a beggar to his bed

And graced thy poor sire with his bridal day,

Even then that sunshine brewed a shower for him

That washed his father’s fortunes forth of France

And heaped sedition on his crown at home.

For what hath broached this tumult but thy pride?

Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept,

And we, in pity of the gentle king,

Had slipped our claim until another age.

And in this resolution, I defy thee,

Not willing any longer conference,

Since thou denied’st the gentle king to speak.—

Sound, trumpets! Let our bloody colors wave;

And either victory or else a grave!

No, wrangling woman, we’ll no longer stay.

These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.

Smile, gentle heaven, or strike, ungentle death,

For this world frowns and Edward’s sun is clouded.

Bootless is flight; they follow us with wings,

And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.

O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine,

And in this vow do chain my soul to thine

And, ere my knee rise from the Earth’s cold face,

I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to Thee,

Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,

Beseeching Thee, if with Thy will it stands

That to my foes this body must be prey,

Yet that Thy brazen gates of heaven may ope

And give sweet passage to my sinful soul.

Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,

Where’er it be, in heaven or in Earth.

Now breathe we, lords. Good fortune bids us pause

And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.

Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen

That led calm Henry, though he were a king,

As doth a sail filled with a fretting gust

Command an argosy to stem the waves.

But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?

See who it is; and, now the battle’s ended,

If friend or foe, let him be gently used.

Bring forth that fatal screech owl to our house

That nothing sung but death to us and ours;

Now death shall stop his dismal threat’ning sound,

And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.

Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.

Thou pitied’st Rutland; I will pity thee.

Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;

For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,

And never will I undertake the thing

Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.—

Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,

And George, of Clarence. Warwick as ourself

Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.

Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Albans field

This lady’s husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,

His land then seized on by the conqueror.

Her suit is now to repossess those lands,

Which we in justice cannot well deny,

Because in quarrel of the house of York

The worthy gentleman did lose his life.

It were no less, but yet I’ll make a pause.

Widow, we will consider of your suit,

And come some other time to know our mind.

How many children hast thou, widow? Tell me.

’Twere pity they should lose their father’s lands.

Lords, give us leave. I’ll try this widow’s wit.

Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?

And would you not do much to do them good?

Then get your husband’s lands to do them good.

I’ll tell you how these lands are to be got.

What service wilt thou do me if I give them?

But you will take exceptions to my boon.

Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.

An easy task; ’tis but to love a king.

Why, then, thy husband’s lands I freely give thee.

But stay thee; ’tis the fruits of love I mean.

Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.

What love, think’st thou, I sue so much to get?

No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.

But now you partly may perceive my mind.

To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.

Why, then, thou shalt not have thy husband’s lands.

Therein thou wrong’st thy children mightily.

Ay, if thou wilt say “ay” to my request;

No, if thou dost say “no” to my demand.

Her looks doth argue her replete with modesty;

Her words doth show her wit incomparable;

All her perfections challenge sovereignty.

One way or other, she is for a king,

And she shall be my love or else my queen.—

Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?

Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee

I speak no more than what my soul intends,

And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.

You cavil, widow; I did mean my queen.

No more than when my daughters call thee mother.

Thou art a widow and thou hast some children,

And, by God’s mother, I, being but a bachelor,

Have other some. Why, ’tis a happy thing

To be the father unto many sons.

Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.

Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.

You’d think it strange if I should marry her.

Why, Clarence, to myself.

Well, jest on, brothers. I can tell you both

Her suit is granted for her husband’s lands.

See that he be conveyed unto the Tower.

And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,

To question of his apprehension.—

Widow, go you along.—Lords, use her honorably.

Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,

That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?

Suppose they take offense without a cause,

They are but Lewis and Warwick; I am Edward,

Your king and Warwick’s, and must have my will.

Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?

Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,

Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey

Should not become my wife and England’s queen?

And you too, Somerset and Montague,

Speak freely what you think.

What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased

By such invention as I can devise?

Ay, what of that? It was my will and grant,

And for this once my will shall stand for law.

Alas, poor Clarence, is it for a wife

That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.

Leave me or tarry, Edward will be king

And not be tied unto his brother’s will.

My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns.

What danger or what sorrow can befall thee

So long as Edward is thy constant friend

And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?

Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,

Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;

Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,

And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.

Now, messenger, what letters or what news from France?

Go to, we pardon thee. Therefore, in brief,

Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.

What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?

Is Lewis so brave? Belike he thinks me Henry.

But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?

I blame not her; she could say little less;

She had the wrong. But what said Henry’s queen?

For I have heard that she was there in place.

Belike she minds to play the Amazon.

But what said Warwick to these injuries?

Ha! Durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?

Well, I will arm me, being thus forewarned.

They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.

But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?

Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick?

Yet am I armed against the worst can happen,

And haste is needful in this desp’rate case.

Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf

Go levy men and make prepare for war.

They are already, or quickly will be, landed.

Myself in person will straight follow you.

But ere I go, Hastings and Montague,

Resolve my doubt: you twain, of all the rest,

Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance.

Tell me if you love Warwick more than me.

If it be so, then both depart to him.

I rather wish you foes than hollow friends.

But if you mind to hold your true obedience,

Give me assurance with some friendly vow,

That I may never have you in suspect.

Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?

Why, so. Then am I sure of victory.

Now therefore let us hence and lose no hour

Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.

The Duke?

Why, Warwick, when we parted, thou call’dst me king.

Yea, brother of Clarence, art thou here too?

Nay, then, I see that Edward needs must down.

Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,

Of thee thyself and all thy complices,

Edward will always bear himself as king.

Though Fortune’s malice overthrow my state,

My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.

What Fates impose, that men must needs abide;

It boots not to resist both wind and tide.

Nay, this way, man. See where the huntsmen stand.—

Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,

Stand you thus close to steal the Bishop’s deer?

But whither shall we then?

Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.

Huntsman, what sayst thou? Wilt thou go along?

Bishop, farewell; shield thee from Warwick’s frown,

And pray that I may repossess the crown.

Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest:

Yet thus far Fortune maketh us amends,

And says that once more I shall interchange

My wanèd state for Henry’s regal crown.

Well have we passed, and now re-passed, the seas,

And brought desirèd help from Burgundy.

What then remains, we being thus arrived

From Ravenspurgh Haven before the gates of York,

But that we enter as into our dukedom?

Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us.

By fair or foul means we must enter in,

For hither will our friends repair to us.

But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,

Yet Edward, at the least, is Duke of York.

Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,

As being well content with that alone.

So, master mayor, these gates must not be shut

But in the night or in the time of war.

What, fear not, man, but yield me up the keys.

For Edward will defend the town and thee

And all those friends that deign to follow me.

Welcome, Sir John. But why come you in arms?

Thanks, good Montgomery. But we now forget

Our title to the crown, and only claim

Our dukedom, till God please to send the rest.

Nay, stay, Sir John, a while, and we’ll debate

By what safe means the crown may be recovered.

When we grow stronger, then we’ll make our claim.

Till then ’tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.

Then be it as you will, for ’tis my right,

And Henry but usurps the diadem.

Thanks, brave Montgomery, and thanks unto you all.

If fortune serve me, I’ll requite this kindness.

Now, for this night let’s harbor here in York,

And when the morning sun shall raise his car

Above the border of this horizon,

We’ll forward towards Warwick and his mates;

For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.

Ah, froward Clarence, how evil it beseems thee

To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!

Yet, as we may, we’ll meet both thee and Warwick.

Come on, brave soldiers; doubt not of the day;

And that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.

Seize on the shamefaced Henry, bear him hence,

And once again proclaim us King of England.—

You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow.

Now stops thy spring; my sea shall suck them dry

And swell so much the higher by their ebb.—

Hence with him to the Tower. Let him not speak.

And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course,

Where peremptory Warwick now remains.

The sun shines hot, and if we use delay,

Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.

Go, Trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.

Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,

Speak gentle words, and humbly bend thy knee?

Call Edward king, and at his hands beg mercy,

And he shall pardon thee these outrages.

Why, then, ’tis mine, if but by Warwick’s gift.

But Warwick’s king is Edward’s prisoner.

And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:

What is the body when the head is off?

’Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.

Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,

This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair,

Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,

Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood:

“Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.”

So other foes may set upon our backs.

Stand we in good array, for they no doubt

Will issue out again and bid us battle.

If not, the city being but of small defense,

We’ll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.

The harder matched, the greater victory.

My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.

Now, welcome more, and ten times more beloved,

Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.

What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?

Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?

Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.—

Lords, to the field! Saint George and victory!

So, lie thou there. Die thou, and die our fear,

For Warwick was a bug that feared us all.

Now, Montague, sit fast. I seek for thee,

That Warwick’s bones may keep thine company.

Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,

And we are graced with wreaths of victory.

But in the midst of this bright-shining day,

I spy a black suspicious threat’ning cloud

That will encounter with our glorious sun

Ere he attain his easeful western bed.

I mean, my lords, those powers that the Queen

Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast

And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.

We are advertised by our loving friends

That they do hold their course toward Tewkesbury.

We having now the best at Barnet Field

Will thither straight, for willingness rids way,

And, as we march, our strength will be augmented

In every county as we go along.

Strike up the drum, cry “Courage!” and away.

Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood

Which by the heavens’ assistance and your strength

Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.

I need not add more fuel to your fire,

For, well I wot, you blaze to burn them out.

Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!

Now here a period of tumultuous broils.

Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight.

For Somerset, off with his guilty head.

Go bear them hence. I will not hear them speak.

Is proclamation made that who finds Edward

Shall have a high reward, and he his life?

Bring forth the gallant; let us hear him speak.

What, can so young a thorn begin to prick?—

Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make

For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,

And all the trouble thou hast turned me to?

Peace, willful boy, or I will charm your tongue.

Take that, the likeness of this railer here!

Hold, Richard, hold, for we have done too much.

What, doth she swoon? Use means for her recovery.

Away with her. Go bear her hence perforce.

Away, I say! I charge you bear her hence.

Where’s Richard gone?

He’s sudden if a thing comes in his head.

Now march we hence. Discharge the common sort

With pay and thanks, and let’s away to London

And see our gentle queen how well she fares.

By this I hope she hath a son for me.

Once more we sit in England’s royal throne,

Repurchased with the blood of enemies.

What valiant foemen, like to autumn’s corn,

Have we mowed down in tops of all their pride!

Three dukes of Somerset, threefold renowned

For hardy and undoubted champions;

Two Cliffords, as the father and the son;

And two Northumberlands; two braver men

Ne’er spurred their coursers at the trumpet’s sound.

With them the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,

That in their chains fettered the kingly lion

And made the forest tremble when they roared.

Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat

And made our footstool of security.—

Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.—

Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself

Have in our armors watched the winter’s night,

Went all afoot in summer’s scalding heat,

That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace,

And of our labors thou shalt reap the gain.

Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen,

And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.

Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.

Now am I seated as my soul delights,

Having my country’s peace and brothers’ loves.

Away with her, and waft her hence to France.

And now what rests but that we spend the time

With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,

Such as befits the pleasure of the court?

Sound drums and trumpets! Farewell, sour annoy,

For here I hope begins our lasting joy.

