


Father, you cannot disinherit me.

If you be king, why should not I succeed?

When I return with victory from the field,

I’ll see your Grace. Till then, I’ll follow her.

My gracious father, by your kingly leave,

I’ll draw it as apparent to the crown

And in that quarrel use it to the death.

My royal father, cheer these noble lords

And hearten those that fight in your defense.

Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry “Saint George!”

If that be right which Warwick says is right,

There is no wrong, but everything is right.

Fly, father, fly, for all your friends are fled,

And Warwick rages like a chafèd bull.

Away, for Death doth hold us in pursuit.

And why not “Queen”?

To Edward, but not to the English king.

Nay, mark how Lewis stamps as he were nettled.

I hope all’s for the best.

Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it,

And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.

Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit

Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,

Infuse his breast with magnanimity

And make him, naked, foil a man-at-arms.

I speak not this as doubting any here,

For did I but suspect a fearful man,

He should have leave to go away betimes,

Lest in our need he might infect another

And make him of like spirit to himself.

If any such be here, as God forbid,

Let him depart before we need his help.

And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.

Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York.

Suppose that I am now my father’s mouth:

Resign thy chair, and where I stand, kneel thou,

Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee

Which, traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.

Let Aesop fable in a winter’s night;

His currish riddles sorts not with this place.

Nay, take away this scolding crookback, rather.

I know my duty. You are all undutiful.

Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,

And thou misshapen Dick, I tell you all

I am your better, traitors as you are,

And thou usurp’st my father’s right and mine.

