


He is very busy about it. But,

brother, I can tell you strange news that you yet

dreamt not of.

As the events stamps them, but

they have a good cover; they show well outward.

The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached

alley in mine orchard, were thus much

overheard by a man of mine: the Prince discovered

to Claudio that he loved my niece your daughter and

meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if

he found her accordant, he meant to take the

present time by the top and instantly break with you

of it.

A good sharp fellow. I will send

for him, and question him yourself.

I saw him not.

In faith, she’s too curst.

Well, niece, I trust you

will be ruled by your father.

If you go on thus, you will kill yourself,

And ’tis not wisdom thus to second grief

Against yourself.

Therein do men from children nothing differ.

Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.

Make those that do offend you suffer too.

Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.

If he could right himself with quarrelling,

Some of us would lie low.

He shall kill two of us, and men indeed,

But that’s no matter. Let him kill one first.

Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.—

Come, follow me, boy. Come, sir boy, come, follow me.

Sir boy, I’ll whip you from your foining fence,

Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.

Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece,

And she is dead, slandered to death by villains

That dare as well answer a man indeed

As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.—

Boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!

Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,

And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple—

Scambling, outfacing, fashionmonging boys,

That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,

Go anticly and show outward hideousness,

And speak off half a dozen dang’rous words

How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst,

And this is all.

Come, ’tis no matter.

Do not you meddle. Let me deal in this.

And shall, or some of us will smart for it.

Farewell, my lords. We look for you tomorrow.

Well, I am glad that all things sorts so well.

Which I will do with confirmed countenance.

