


Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?

If Signior Leonato be her father, she would

not have his head on her shoulders for all Messina,

as like him as she is.

What, my dear Lady Disdain! Are you yet

living?

Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain

I am loved of all ladies, only you excepted; and

I would I could find in my heart that I had not a

hard heart, for truly I love none.

God keep your Ladyship still in that mind,

so some gentleman or other shall ’scape a predestinate

scratched face.

Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.

I would my horse had the speed of your

tongue and so good a continuer, but keep your

way, i’ God’s name, I have done.

I noted her not, but I looked on her.

Do you question me as an honest man

should do, for my simple true judgment? Or would

you have me speak after my custom, as being a

professed tyrant to their sex?

Why, i’ faith, methinks she’s too low for a

high praise, too brown for a fair praise, and too

little for a great praise. Only this commendation I

can afford her, that were she other than she is, she

were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is,

I do not like her.

Would you buy her that you enquire after

her?

Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you

this with a sad brow? Or do you play the flouting

jack, to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder and

Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key shall a

man take you to go in the song?

I can see yet without spectacles, and I see

no such matter. There’s her cousin, an she were not

possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in

beauty as the first of May doth the last of December.

But I hope you have no intent to turn husband, have

you?

Is ’t come to this? In faith, hath not the

world one man but he will wear his cap with

suspicion? Shall I never see a bachelor of threescore

again? Go to, i’ faith, an thou wilt needs thrust

thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it, and sigh

away Sundays. Look, Don Pedro is returned to seek

you.

I would your Grace would constrain me to

tell.

You hear, Count Claudio, I can be secret as

a dumb man, I would have you think so, but on my

allegiance—mark you this, on my allegiance—he

is in love. With who? Now, that is your Grace’s part.

Mark how short his answer is: with Hero, Leonato’s

short daughter.

Like the old tale, my lord: “It is not so, nor

’twas not so, but, indeed, God forbid it should be

so.”

And by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I

spoke mine.

That I neither feel how she should be loved

nor know how she should be worthy is the opinion

that fire cannot melt out of me. I will die in it at the

stake.

That a woman conceived me, I thank her;

that she brought me up, I likewise give her most

humble thanks. But that I will have a recheat

winded in my forehead or hang my bugle in an

invisible baldrick, all women shall pardon me.

Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust

any, I will do myself the right to trust none. And the

fine is, for the which I may go the finer, I will live a

bachelor.

With anger, with sickness, or with hunger,

my lord, not with love. Prove that ever I lose more

blood with love than I will get again with drinking,

pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker’s pen and

hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the

sign of blind Cupid.

If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and

shoot at me, and he that hits me, let him be clapped

on the shoulder and called Adam.

The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible

Benedick bear it, pluck off the bull’s horns and set

them in my forehead, and let me be vilely painted,

and in such great letters as they write “Here is good

horse to hire” let them signify under my sign “Here

you may see Benedick the married man.”

I look for an earthquake too, then.

I have almost matter enough in me for such

an embassage, and so I commit you—

Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your

discourse is sometimes guarded with fragments,

and the guards are but slightly basted on neither.

Ere you flout old ends any further, examine your

conscience. And so I leave you.

Well, I would you did like me.

Which is one?

I love you the better; the hearers may cry

“Amen.”

No, you shall pardon me.

Not now.

What’s he?

Not I, believe me.

I pray you, what is he?

When I know the gentleman, I’ll tell him

what you say.

In every good thing.

Count Claudio?

Come, will you go with me?

Even to the next willow, about your own

business, county. What fashion will you wear the

garland of? About your neck like an usurer’s chain?

Or under your arm like a lieutenant’s scarf? You

must wear it one way, for the Prince hath got your

Hero.

Why, that’s spoken like an honest drover; so

they sell bullocks. But did you think the Prince

would have served you thus?

Ho, now you strike like the blind man.

’Twas the boy that stole your meat, and you’ll beat

the post.

Alas, poor hurt fowl, now will he creep into

sedges. But that my Lady Beatrice should know

me, and not know me! The Prince’s fool! Ha, it may

be I go under that title because I am merry. Yea, but

so I am apt to do myself wrong. I am not so reputed!

It is the base, though bitter, disposition of Beatrice

that puts the world into her person and so gives me

out. Well, I’ll be revenged as I may.

Troth, my lord, I have played the part of

Lady Fame. I found him here as melancholy as a

lodge in a warren. I told him, and I think I told him

true, that your Grace had got the goodwill of this

young lady, and I offered him my company to a

willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being

forsaken, or to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to

be whipped.

The flat transgression of a schoolboy who,

being overjoyed with finding a bird’s nest, shows it

his companion, and he steals it.

Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been

made, and the garland too, for the garland he

might have worn himself, and the rod he might

have bestowed on you, who, as I take it, have stolen

his bird’s nest.

If their singing answer your saying, by my

faith, you say honestly.

O, she misused me past the endurance of a

block! An oak but with one green leaf on it would

have answered her. My very visor began to assume

life and scold with her. She told me, not thinking I

had been myself, that I was the Prince’s jester, that I

was duller than a great thaw, huddling jest upon jest

with such impossible conveyance upon me that I

stood like a man at a mark with a whole army

shooting at me. She speaks poniards, and every

word stabs. If her breath were as terrible as her

terminations, there were no living near her; she

would infect to the North Star. I would not marry

her though she were endowed with all that Adam

had left him before he transgressed. She would have

made Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft

his club to make the fire, too. Come, talk not of her.

You shall find her the infernal Ate in good apparel. I

would to God some scholar would conjure her, for

certainly, while she is here, a man may live as quiet

in hell as in a sanctuary, and people sin upon

purpose because they would go thither. So indeed

all disquiet, horror, and perturbation follows her.

Will your Grace command me any service

to the world’s end? I will go on the slightest errand

now to the Antipodes that you can devise to send

me on. I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the

furthest inch of Asia, bring you the length of Prester

John’s foot, fetch you a hair off the great Cham’s

beard, do you any embassage to the Pygmies, rather

than hold three words’ conference with this harpy.

You have no employment for me?

O God, sir, here’s a dish I love not! I cannot

endure my Lady Tongue.

Boy!

In my chamber window lies a book. Bring it

hither to me in the orchard.

I know that, but I would have thee hence

and here again.

I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much

another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviors

to love, will, after he hath laughed at such

shallow follies in others, become the argument of

his own scorn by falling in love—and such a man is

Claudio. I have known when there was no music

with him but the drum and the fife, and now had he

rather hear the tabor and the pipe; I have known

when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a

good armor, and now will he lie ten nights awake

carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont

to speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest

man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography;

his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so

many strange dishes. May I be so converted and see

with these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not. I will not

be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster,

but I’ll take my oath on it, till he have made an

oyster of me, he shall never make me such a fool.

One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet

I am well; another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all

graces be in one woman, one woman shall not

come in my grace. Rich she shall be, that’s certain;

wise, or I’ll none; virtuous, or I’ll never cheapen

her; fair, or I’ll never look on her; mild, or come not

near me; noble, or not I for an angel; of good

discourse, an excellent musician, and her hair shall

be of what color it please God. Ha! The Prince and

Monsieur Love! I will hide me in the arbor.

Now, divine air! Now is his soul

ravished. Is it not strange that sheeps’ guts should

hale souls out of men’s bodies? Well, a horn for my

money, when all’s done.

An he had been a dog that should

have howled thus, they would have hanged him. And

I pray God his bad voice bode no mischief. I had as

lief have heard the night raven, come what plague

could have come after it.

Is ’t possible? Sits the wind in that

corner?

I should think this a gull but that the

white-bearded fellow speaks it. Knavery cannot,

sure, hide himself in such reverence.

This can be no trick. The

conference was sadly borne; they have the truth of

this from Hero; they seem to pity the lady. It seems

her affections have their full bent. Love me? Why, it

must be requited! I hear how I am censured. They

say I will bear myself proudly if I perceive the love

come from her. They say, too, that she will rather

die than give any sign of affection. I did never think

to marry. I must not seem proud. Happy are they

that hear their detractions and can put them to

mending. They say the lady is fair; ’tis a truth, I can

bear them witness. And virtuous; ’tis so, I cannot

reprove it. And wise, but for loving me; by my troth,

it is no addition to her wit, nor no great argument of

her folly, for I will be horribly in love with her! I

may chance have some odd quirks and remnants of

wit broken on me because I have railed so long

against marriage, but doth not the appetite alter? A

man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot

endure in his age. Shall quips and sentences and

these paper bullets of the brain awe a man from the

career of his humor? No! The world must be peopled.

When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not

think I should live till I were married. Here comes

Beatrice. By this day, she’s a fair lady. I do spy some

marks of love in her.

Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.

You take pleasure then in the message?

Ha! “Against my will I am sent to bid you

come in to dinner.” There’s a double meaning in

that. “I took no more pains for those thanks than

you took pains to thank me.” That’s as much as to

say “Any pains that I take for you is as easy as

thanks.” If I do not take pity of her, I am a villain; if I

do not love her, I am a Jew. I will go get her picture.

Gallants, I am not as I have been.

I have the toothache.

Hang it!

Well, everyone can master a grief but he

that has it.

Yet is this no charm for the toothache.—

Old signior, walk aside with me. I have studied eight

or nine wise words to speak to you, which these

hobby-horses must not hear.

How now, interjections? Why, then, some

be of laughing, as ah, ha, he!

This looks not like a nuptial.

How doth the lady?

Sir, sir, be patient.

For my part, I am so attired in wonder

I know not what to say.

Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?

Two of them have the very bent of honor,

And if their wisdoms be misled in this,

The practice of it lives in John the Bastard,

Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.

Signior Leonato, let the Friar advise you.

And though you know my inwardness and love

Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio,

Yet, by mine honor, I will deal in this

As secretly and justly as your soul

Should with your body.

Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?

I will not desire that.

Surely I do believe your fair cousin is

wronged.

Is there any way to show such friendship?

May a man do it?

I do love nothing in the world so well as

you. Is not that strange?

By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me!

I will swear by it that you love me, and I will

make him eat it that says I love not you.

With no sauce that can be devised to it. I

protest I love thee.

What offense, sweet Beatrice?

And do it with all thy heart.

Come, bid me do anything for thee.

Ha! Not for the wide world.

Tarry, sweet Beatrice.

Beatrice—

We’ll be friends first.

Is Claudio thine enemy?

Hear me, Beatrice—

Nay, but Beatrice—

Beat—

Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love

thee.

Think you in your soul the Count Claudio

hath wronged Hero?

Enough, I am engaged. I will challenge

him. I will kiss your hand, and so I leave you. By

this hand, Claudio shall render me a dear account.

As you hear of me, so think of me. Go comfort your

cousin. I must say she is dead, and so farewell.

Good day, my lord.

In a false quarrel there is no true valor. I

came to seek you both.

It is in my scabbard. Shall I draw it?

Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, an

you charge it against me. I pray you, choose another

subject.

Shall I speak a word in your ear?

You are a villain. I jest

not. I will make it good how you dare, with what you

dare, and when you dare. Do me right, or I will

protest your cowardice. You have killed a sweet

lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me

hear from you.

Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.

Fare you well, boy. You know my mind. I

will leave you now to your gossip-like humor. You

break jests as braggarts do their blades, which, God

be thanked, hurt not.—My lord, for your many

courtesies I thank you. I must discontinue your

company. Your brother the Bastard is fled from

Messina. You have among you killed a sweet and

innocent lady. For my Lord Lackbeard there, he and

I shall meet, and till then peace be with him.

Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve

well at my hands by helping me to the speech of

Beatrice.

In so high a style, Margaret, that no man

living shall come over it, for in most comely truth

thou deservest it.

Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound’s

mouth; it catches.

A most manly wit, Margaret; it will not hurt

a woman. And so, I pray thee, call Beatrice. I give

thee the bucklers.

If you use them, Margaret, you must put in

the pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous

weapons for maids.

And therefore will come.

The god of love

That sits above,

And knows me, and knows me,

How pitiful I deserve—

I mean in singing. But in loving, Leander the good

swimmer, Troilus the first employer of panders, and

a whole book full of these quondam carpetmongers,

whose names yet run smoothly in the even

road of a blank verse, why, they were never so truly

turned over and over as my poor self in love. Marry,

I cannot show it in rhyme. I have tried. I can find out

no rhyme to “lady” but “baby”—an innocent

rhyme; for “scorn,” “horn”—a hard rhyme; for

“school,” “fool”—a babbling rhyme; very ominous

endings. No, I was not born under a rhyming

planet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms.

Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called

thee?

O, stay but till then!

Only foul words, and thereupon I will kiss

thee.

Thou hast frighted the word out of his right

sense, so forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee

plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either

I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe

him a coward. And I pray thee now tell me, for

which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love

with me?

Suffer love! A good epithet. I do suffer love

indeed, for I love thee against my will.

Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.

An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived

in the time of good neighbors. If a man do not erect

in this age his own tomb ere he dies, he shall live no

longer in monument than the bell rings and the

widow weeps.

Question: why, an hour in clamor and a

quarter in rheum. Therefore is it most expedient for

the wise, if Don Worm, his conscience, find no

impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet of

his own virtues, as I am to myself. So much for

praising myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is

praiseworthy. And now tell me, how doth your

cousin?

And how do you?

Serve God, love me, and mend. There will I

leave you too, for here comes one in haste.

I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be

buried in thy eyes—and, moreover, I will go with

thee to thy uncle’s.

And so am I, being else by faith enforced

To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.

Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.

To bind me, or undo me, one of them.—

Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,

Your niece regards me with an eye of favor.

And I do with an eye of love requite her.

Your answer, sir, is enigmatical.

But for my will, my will is your goodwill

May stand with ours, this day to be conjoined

In the state of honorable marriage—

In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.

Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low,

And some such strange bull leapt your father’s cow

And got a calf in that same noble feat

Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.

Soft and fair, friar.—Which is Beatrice?

Do not you love me?

Why then, your uncle and the Prince and Claudio

Have been deceived. They swore you did.

Troth, no, no more than reason.

They swore that you were almost sick for me.

’Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?

A miracle! Here’s our own hands against

our hearts. Come, I will have thee, but by this light

I take thee for pity.

Peace! I will stop your mouth.

I’ll tell thee what, prince: a college of

wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humor.

Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram?

No. If a man will be beaten with brains, he shall

wear nothing handsome about him. In brief, since I

do purpose to marry, I will think nothing to any

purpose that the world can say against it, and

therefore never flout at me for what I have said

against it. For man is a giddy thing, and this is my

conclusion.—For thy part, Claudio, I did think to

have beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my

kinsman, live unbruised, and love my cousin.

Come, come, we are friends. Let’s have a

dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our

own hearts and our wives’ heels.

First, of my word! Therefore play, music.—

Prince, thou art sad. Get thee a wife, get thee a wife.

There is no staff more reverend than one tipped

with horn.

Think not on him till tomorrow.

I’ll devise thee brave punishments for him.—Strike

up, pipers!

