


If it be love indeed, tell me how much.

I’ll set a bourn how far to be beloved.

Nay, hear them, Antony.

Fulvia perchance is angry. Or who knows

If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent

His powerful mandate to you: “Do this, or this;

Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that.

Perform ’t, or else we damn thee.”

Perchance? Nay, and most like.

You must not stay here longer; your dismission

Is come from Caesar. Therefore hear it, Antony.

Where’s Fulvia’s process? Caesar’s, I would say— both?

Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt’s queen,

Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine

Is Caesar’s homager; else so thy cheek pays shame

When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!

Excellent falsehood!

Why did he marry Fulvia and not love her?

I’ll seem the fool I am not. Antony

Will be himself.

Hear the ambassadors.

Saw you my lord?

Was he not here?

He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden

A Roman thought hath struck him.—Enobarbus!

Seek him and bring him hither.—Where’s Alexas?

We will not look upon him. Go with us.

Where is he?

See where he is, who’s with him, what he does.

I did not send you. If you find him sad,

Say I am dancing; if in mirth, report

That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.

What should I do I do not?

Thou teachest like a fool: the way to lose him.

I am sick and sullen.

Help me away, dear Charmian! I shall fall.

It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature

Will not sustain it.

Pray you stand farther from me.

I know by that same eye there’s some good news.

What, says the married woman you may go?

Would she had never given you leave to come.

Let her not say ’tis I that keep you here.

I have no power upon you. Hers you are.

O, never was there queen

So mightily betrayed! Yet at the first

I saw the treasons planted.

Why should I think you can be mine, and true—

Though you in swearing shake the thronèd gods—

Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,

To be entangled with those mouth-made vows

Which break themselves in swearing!

Nay, pray you seek no color for your going,

But bid farewell and go. When you sued staying,

Then was the time for words. No going then!

Eternity was in our lips and eyes,

Bliss in our brows’ bent; none our parts so poor

But was a race of heaven. They are so still,

Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,

Art turned the greatest liar.

I would I had thy inches. Thou shouldst know

There were a heart in Egypt.

Though age from folly could not give me freedom,

It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?

O, most false love!

Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill

With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,

In Fulvia’s death, how mine received shall be.

Cut my lace, Charmian, come!

But let it be; I am quickly ill and well;

So Antony loves.

So Fulvia told me.

I prithee turn aside and weep for her,

Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears

Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene

Of excellent dissembling, and let it look

Like perfect honor.

You can do better yet, but this is meetly.

And target. Still he mends.

But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,

How this Herculean Roman does become

The carriage of his chafe.

Courteous lord, one word.

Sir, you and I must part, but that’s not it;

Sir, you and I have loved, but there’s not it;

That you know well. Something it is I would—

O, my oblivion is a very Antony,

And I am all forgotten.

’Tis sweating labor

To bear such idleness so near the heart

As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me,

Since my becomings kill me when they do not

Eye well to you. Your honor calls you hence;

Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly,

And all the gods go with you. Upon your sword

Sit laurel victory, and smooth success

Be strewed before your feet.

Charmian!

Ha, ha! Give me to drink mandragora.

That I might sleep out this great gap of time

My Antony is away.

O, ’tis treason!

Thou, eunuch Mardian!

Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure

In aught an eunuch has. ’Tis well for thee

That, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts

May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?

Indeed?

O, Charmian,

Where think’st thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?

Or does he walk? Or is he on his horse?

O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!

Do bravely, horse, for wot’st thou whom thou mov’st?

The demi-Atlas of this Earth, the arm

And burgonet of men. He’s speaking now,

Or murmuring “Where’s my serpent of old Nile?”

For so he calls me. Now I feed myself

With most delicious poison. Think on me

That am with Phoebus’ amorous pinches black,

And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,

When thou wast here above the ground, I was

A morsel for a monarch. And great Pompey

Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;

There would he anchor his aspect, and die

With looking on his life.

How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!

Yet coming from him, that great med’cine hath

With his tinct gilded thee.

How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?

Mine ear must pluck it thence.

What, was he sad, or merry?

O, well-divided disposition!—Note him,

Note him, good Charmian, ’tis the man! But note him:

He was not sad, for he would shine on those

That make their looks by his; he was not merry,

Which seemed to tell them his remembrance lay

In Egypt with his joy; but between both.

O, heavenly mingle!—Be’st thou sad or merry,

The violence of either thee becomes,

So does it no man’s else.—Met’st thou my posts?

Who’s born that day

When I forget to send to Antony

Shall die a beggar.—Ink and paper, Charmian.—

Welcome, my good Alexas.—Did I, Charmian,

Ever love Caesar so?

Be choked with such another emphasis!

Say “the brave Antony.”

By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth

If thou with Caesar paragon again

My man of men.

My salad days,

When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,

To say as I said then. But come, away,

Get me ink and paper.

He shall have every day a several greeting,

Or I’ll unpeople Egypt.

Give me some music—music, moody food

Of us that trade in love.

Let it alone. Let’s to billiards. Come, Charmian.

As well a woman with an eunuch played

As with a woman.—Come, you’ll play with me, sir?

And when good will is showed, though ’t come too short,

The actor may plead pardon. I’ll none now.

Give me mine angle; we’ll to th’ river. There,

My music playing far off, I will betray

Tawny-finned fishes. My bended hook shall pierce

Their slimy jaws, and as I draw them up

I’ll think them every one an Antony

And say “Aha! You’re caught.”

That time?—O, times!—

I laughed him out of patience; and that night

I laughed him into patience; and next morn,

Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,

Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst

I wore his sword Philippan.    O, from Italy!

Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,

That long time have been barren.

Antonio’s dead! If thou say so, villain,

Thou kill’st thy mistress. But well and free,

If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here

My bluest veins to kiss, a hand that kings

Have lipped and trembled kissing.

Why, there’s more gold. But sirrah, mark, we use

To say the dead are well. Bring it to that,

The gold I give thee will I melt and pour

Down thy ill-uttering throat.

Well, go to, I will.

But there’s no goodness in thy face—if Antony

Be free and healthful, so tart a favor

To trumpet such good tidings! If not well,

Thou shouldst come like a Fury crowned with snakes,

Not like a formal man.

I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak’st

Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,

Or friends with Caesar or not captive to him,

I’ll set thee in a shower of gold and hail

Rich pearls upon thee.

Well said.

Th’ art an honest man.

Make thee a fortune from me.

I do not like “But yet.” It does allay

The good precedence. Fie upon “But yet.”

“But yet” is as a jailer to bring forth

Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,

Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,

The good and bad together: he’s friends with Caesar,

In state of health, thou say’st, and, thou say’st, free.

For what good turn?

I am pale, Charmian.

The most infectious pestilence upon thee!

What say you?

Hence, horrible villain, or I’ll spurn thine eyes

Like balls before me! I’ll unhair thy head!

Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in brine,

Smarting in ling’ring pickle.

Say ’tis not so, a province I will give thee

And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst

Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage,

And I will boot thee with what gift beside

Thy modesty can beg.

Rogue, thou hast lived too long.

Some innocents ’scape not the thunderbolt.

Melt Egypt into Nile, and kindly creatures

Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.

Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!

I will not hurt him.

These hands do lack nobility that they strike

A meaner than myself, since I myself

Have given myself the cause.    Come hither, sir.

Though it be honest, it is never good

To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message

An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell

Themselves when they be felt.

Is he married?

I cannot hate thee worser than I do

If thou again say “yes.”

The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?

O, I would thou didst,

So half my Egypt were submerged and made

A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence.

Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me

Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?

He is married?

O, that his fault should make a knave of thee

That art not what th’ art sure of! Get thee hence.

The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome

Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand,

And be undone by ’em!

In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.

I am paid for ’t now. Lead me from hence;

I faint. O, Iras, Charmian! ’Tis no matter.—

Go to the fellow, good Alexas. Bid him

Report the feature of Octavia, her years,

Her inclination; let him not leave out

The color of her hair. Bring me word quickly.

Let him forever go—let him not, Charmian.

Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,

The other way ’s a Mars. Bid you Alexas

Bring me word how tall she is.—Pity me, Charmian,

But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.

Where is the fellow?

Go to, go to.—Come hither, sir.

That Herod’s head

I’ll have! But how, when Antony is gone,

Through whom I might command it?—Come thou near.

Did’st thou behold Octavia?

Where?

Is she as tall as me?

Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongued or low?

That’s not so good. He cannot like her long.

I think so, Charmian: dull of tongue, and dwarfish!—

What majesty is in her gait? Remember,

If e’er thou looked’st on majesty.

Is this certain?

He’s very knowing.

I do perceive ’t. There’s nothing in her yet.

The fellow has good judgment.

Guess at her years, I prithee.

Widow? Charmian, hark.

Bear’st thou her face in mind? Is ’t long or round?

For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.

Her hair what color?

There’s gold for thee.

Thou must not take my former sharpness ill.

I will employ thee back again. I find thee

Most fit for business. Go, make thee ready.

Our letters are prepared.

Indeed he is so. I repent me much

That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,

This creature’s no such thing.

The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.

I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian,

But ’tis no matter. Thou shalt bring him to me

Where I will write. All may be well enough.

I will be even with thee, doubt it not.

Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars

And say’st it is not fit.

Is ’t not denounced against us? Why should not we

Be there in person?

What is ’t you say?

Sink Rome, and their tongues rot

That speak against us! A charge we bear i’ th’ war,

And as the president of my kingdom will

Appear there for a man. Speak not against it.

I will not stay behind.

Celerity is never more admired

Than by the negligent.

By sea, what else?

I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.

Let me sit down. O Juno!

Ah, stand by.

Well, then, sustain me. O!

O, my lord, my lord,

Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought

You would have followed.

O, my pardon!

Pardon, pardon!

What shall we do, Enobarbus?

Is Antony or we in fault for this?

Prithee, peace.

That head, my lord?

What, no more ceremony? See, my women,

Against the blown rose may they stop their nose

That kneeled unto the buds.—Admit him, sir.

Caesar’s will?

None but friends. Say boldly.

Go on; right royal.

O!

He is a god and knows

What is most right. Mine honor was not yielded,

But conquered merely.

What’s your name?

Most kind messenger,

Say to great Caesar this in deputation:

I kiss his conqu’ring hand. Tell him I am prompt

To lay my crown at ’s feet, and there to kneel.

Tell him, from his all-obeying breath I hear

The doom of Egypt.

Your Caesar’s father oft,

When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,

Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place

As it rained kisses.

Good my lord—

O, is ’t come to this?

Wherefore is this?

Have you done yet?

I must stay his time.

Not know me yet?

Ah, dear, if I be so,

From my cold heart let heaven engender hail

And poison it in the source, and the first stone

Drop in my neck; as it determines, so

Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite,

Till by degrees the memory of my womb,

Together with my brave Egyptians all,

By the discandying of this pelleted storm

Lie graveless till the flies and gnats of Nile

Have buried them for prey!

That’s my brave lord!

It is my birthday.

I had thought t’ have held it poor. But since my lord

Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.

Call all his noble captains to my lord.

What means this?

What does he mean?

Sleep a little.

Nay, I’ll help too.

What’s this for?

Sooth, la, I’ll help. Thus it must be.

Is not this buckled well?

Lead me.

He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might

Determine this great war in single fight,

Then Antony—but now—. Well, on.

Lord of lords!

O infinite virtue, com’st thou smiling from

The world’s great snare uncaught?

I’ll give thee, friend,

An armor all of gold. It was a king’s.

Why is my lord enraged against his love?

Help me, my women! O, he’s more mad

Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly

Was never so embossed.

To th’ monument!—

Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself.

Say that the last I spoke was “Antony,”

And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,

And bring me how he takes my death.—To th’ monument!

O Charmian, I will never go from hence.

No, I will not.

All strange and terrible events are welcome,

But comforts we despise. Our size of sorrow,

Proportioned to our cause, must be as great

As that which makes it.    How now? Is he dead?

O sun,

Burn the great sphere thou mov’st in. Darkling stand

The varying shore o’ th’ world! O Antony, Antony,

Antony! Help, Charmian! Help, Iras, help!

Help, friends below! Let’s draw him hither.

So it should be that none but Antony

Should conquer Antony, but woe ’tis so!

I dare not, dear,

Dear my lord, pardon, I dare not,

Lest I be taken. Not th’ imperious show

Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall

Be brooched with me; if knife, drugs, serpents have

Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe.

Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes

And still conclusion, shall acquire no honor

Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony.—

Help me, my women!—We must draw thee up.—

Assist, good friends.

Here’s sport indeed. How heavy weighs my lord!

Our strength is all gone into heaviness;

That makes the weight. Had I great Juno’s power,

The strong-winged Mercury should fetch thee up

And set thee by Jove’s side. Yet come a little.

Wishers were ever fools. O, come, come, come!

And welcome, welcome! Die when thou hast lived;

Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,

Thus would I wear them out.

No, let me speak, and let me rail so high

That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,

Provoked by my offense.

They do not go together.

My resolution and my hands I’ll trust,

None about Caesar.

Noblest of men, woo’t die?

Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide

In this dull world, which in thy absence is

No better than a sty? O see, my women,

The crown o’ th’ Earth doth melt.—My lord!

O, withered is the garland of the war;

The soldier’s pole is fall’n; young boys and girls

Are level now with men. The odds is gone,

And there is nothing left remarkable

Beneath the visiting moon.

No more but e’en a woman, and commanded

By such poor passion as the maid that milks

And does the meanest chares. It were for me

To throw my scepter at the injurious gods,

To tell them that this world did equal theirs

Till they had stolen our jewel. All’s but naught.

Patience is sottish, and impatience does

Become a dog that’s mad. Then is it sin

To rush into the secret house of death

Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?

What, what, good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian?

My noble girls! Ah, women, women! Look,

Our lamp is spent; it’s out. Good sirs, take heart.

We’ll bury him; and then, what’s brave, what’s noble,

Let’s do ’t after the high Roman fashion

And make death proud to take us. Come, away.

This case of that huge spirit now is cold.

Ah women, women! Come, we have no friend

But resolution and the briefest end.

My desolation does begin to make

A better life. ’Tis paltry to be Caesar;

Not being Fortune, he’s but Fortune’s knave,

A minister of her will. And it is great

To do that thing that ends all other deeds,

Which shackles accidents and bolts up change,

Which sleeps and never palates more the dung,

The beggar’s nurse, and Caesar’s.

What’s thy name?

Antony

Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but

I do not greatly care to be deceived

That have no use for trusting. If your master

Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him

That majesty, to keep decorum, must

No less beg than a kingdom. If he please

To give me conquered Egypt for my son,

He gives me so much of mine own as I

Will kneel to him with thanks.

Pray you tell him

I am his fortune’s vassal and I send him

The greatness he has got. I hourly learn

A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly

Look him i’ th’ face.

Quick, quick, good hands!

What, of death, too,

That rids our dogs of languish?

Where art thou, Death?

Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen

Worth many babes and beggars.

Sir, I will eat no meat; I’ll not drink, sir.

If idle talk will once be necessary—

I’ll not sleep neither. This mortal house I’ll ruin,

Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I

Will not wait pinioned at your master’s court,

Nor once be chastised with the sober eye

Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up

And show me to the shouting varletry

Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt

Be gentle grave unto me; rather on Nilus’ mud

Lay me stark naked, and let the waterflies

Blow me into abhorring; rather make

My country’s high pyramides my gibbet

And hang me up in chains!

Say I would die.

I cannot tell.

No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.

You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;

Is ’t not your trick?

I dreamt there was an emperor Antony.

O, such another sleep, that I might see

But such another man.

His face was as the heavens, and therein stuck

A sun and moon, which kept their course and lighted

The little O, the Earth.

His legs bestrid the ocean, his reared arm

Crested the world. His voice was propertied

As all the tunèd spheres, and that to friends;

But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,

He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,

There was no winter in ’t; an autumn ’twas

That grew the more by reaping. His delights

Were dolphin-like; they showed his back above

The element they lived in. In his livery

Walked crowns and crownets; realms and islands were

As plates dropped from his pocket.

Think you there was, or might be, such a man

As this I dreamt of?

You lie up to the hearing of the gods!

But if there be nor ever were one such,

It’s past the size of dreaming. Nature wants stuff

To vie strange forms with fancy, yet t’ imagine

An Antony were nature’s piece ’gainst fancy,

Condemning shadows quite.

I thank you, sir.

Know you what Caesar means to do with me?

Nay, pray you, sir.

He’ll lead me, then, in triumph.

Sir, the gods

Will have it thus. My master and my lord

I must obey.

Sole sir o’ th’ world,

I cannot project mine own cause so well

To make it clear, but do confess I have

Been laden with like frailties which before

Have often shamed our sex.

And may through all the world. ’Tis yours, and we,

Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall

Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.

This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels

I am possessed of. ’Tis exactly valued,

Not petty things admitted.—Where’s Seleucus?

This is my treasurer. Let him speak, my lord,

Upon his peril, that I have reserved

To myself nothing.—Speak the truth, Seleucus.

What have I kept back?

See, Caesar, O, behold

How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours,

And should we shift estates, yours would be mine.

The ingratitude of this Seleucus does

Even make me wild.—O slave, of no more trust

Than love that’s hired! What, goest thou back? Thou shalt

Go back, I warrant thee! But I’ll catch thine eyes

Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog!

O rarely base!

O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,

That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,

Doing the honor of thy lordliness

To one so meek, that mine own servant should

Parcel the sum of my disgraces by

Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,

That I some lady trifles have reserved,

Immoment toys, things of such dignity

As we greet modern friends withal, and say

Some nobler token I have kept apart

For Livia and Octavia, to induce

Their mediation, must I be unfolded

With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me

Beneath the fall I have. Prithee, go hence,

Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits

Through th’ ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man,

Thou wouldst have mercy on me.

Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought

For things that others do; and when we fall,

We answer others’ merits in our name—

Are therefore to be pitied.

My master and my lord!

He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not

Be noble to myself. But hark thee, Charmian.

Hie thee again.

I have spoke already, and it is provided.

Go put it to the haste.

Dolabella.

Dolabella,

I shall remain your debtor.

Farewell, and thanks. Now, Iras, what think’st thou?

Thou an Egyptian puppet shall be shown

In Rome as well as I. Mechanic slaves

With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers shall

Uplift us to the view. In their thick breaths,

Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclouded

And forced to drink their vapor.

Nay, ’tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors

Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers

Ballad us out o’ tune. The quick comedians

Extemporally will stage us and present

Our Alexandrian revels. Antony

Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see

Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness

I’ th’ posture of a whore.

Nay, that’s certain.

Why, that’s the way

To fool their preparation and to conquer

Their most absurd intents.    Now, Charmian!

Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch

My best attires. I am again for Cydnus

To meet Mark Antony. Sirrah Iras, go.—

Now, noble Charmian, we’ll dispatch indeed,

And when thou hast done this chare, I’ll give thee leave

To play till Doomsday.—Bring our crown and all.

Wherefore’s this noise?

Let him come in. What poor an instrument

May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty.

My resolution’s placed, and I have nothing

Of woman in me. Now from head to foot

I am marble-constant. Now the fleeting moon

No planet is of mine.

Avoid, and leave him.

Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there

That kills and pains not?

Remember’st thou any that have died on ’t?

Get thee hence. Farewell.

Farewell.

Ay, ay, farewell.

Take thou no care; it shall be heeded.

Will it eat me?

Well, get thee gone. Farewell.

Give me my robe. Put on my crown. I have

Immortal longings in me. Now no more

The juice of Egypt’s grape shall moist this lip.

Yare, yare, good Iras, quick. Methinks I hear

Antony call. I see him rouse himself

To praise my noble act. I hear him mock

The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men

To excuse their after wrath.—Husband, I come!

Now to that name my courage prove my title.

I am fire and air; my other elements

I give to baser life.—So, have you done?

Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.

Farewell, kind Charmian.—Iras, long farewell.

Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?

If thou and nature can so gently part,

The stroke of death is as a lover’s pinch,

Which hurts and is desired. Dost thou lie still?

If thus thou vanishest, thou tell’st the world

It is not worth leave-taking.

This proves me base.

If she first meet the curlèd Antony,

He’ll make demand of her, and spend that kiss

Which is my heaven to have.—Come, thou mortal wretch,

With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate

Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool,

Be angry and dispatch. O, couldst thou speak,

That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass

Unpolicied!

Peace, peace!

Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,

That sucks the nurse asleep?

As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle—

O Antony!—Nay, I will take thee too.

What should I stay—

