


Bring in the banquet quickly, wine enough

Cleopatra’s health to drink.

Mine, and most of our fortunes tonight,

shall be—drunk to bed.

Hush, here comes Antony.

No, lady.

Madam?

What’s your pleasure, sir?

Why then we kill all our women. We see

how mortal an unkindness is to them. If they suffer

our departure, death’s the word.

Under a compelling occasion, let women

die. It were pity to cast them away for nothing,

though between them and a great cause, they

should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching

but the least noise of this, dies instantly. I have seen

her die twenty times upon far poorer moment. I do

think there is mettle in death which commits some

loving act upon her, she hath such a celerity in

dying.

Alack, sir, no, her passions are made of

nothing but the finest part of pure love. We cannot

call her winds and waters sighs and tears; they are

greater storms and tempests than almanacs can

report. This cannot be cunning in her; if it be, she

makes a shower of rain as well as Jove.

O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful

piece of work, which not to have been blest

withal would have discredited your travel.

Sir?

Fulvia?

Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice.

When it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a

man from him, it shows to man the tailors of the

Earth; comforting therein, that when old robes are

worn out, there are members to make new. If there

were no more women but Fulvia, then had you

indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented. This grief

is crowned with consolation; your old smock brings

forth a new petticoat, and indeed the tears live in an

onion that should water this sorrow.

And the business you have broached here

cannot be without you, especially that of Cleopatra’s,

which wholly depends on your abode.

I shall do ’t.

I shall entreat him

To answer like himself. If Caesar move him,

Let Antony look over Caesar’s head

And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,

Were I the wearer of Antonio’s beard,

I would not shave ’t today.

Every time serves for the matter that is

then born in ’t.

Not if the small come first.

And yonder Caesar.

Would we had all such wives, that the men

might go to wars with the women!

Or, if you borrow one another’s love for

the instant, you may, when you hear no more words

of Pompey, return it again. You shall have time to

wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.

That truth should be silent I had almost

forgot.

Go to, then. Your considerate stone.

Half the heart of Caesar, worthy

Maecenas!—My honorable friend Agrippa!

Ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance

and made the night light with drinking.

This was but as a fly by an eagle. We had

much more monstrous matter of feast, which worthily

deserved noting.

When she first met Mark Antony, she

pursed up his heart upon the river of Cydnus.

I will tell you.

The barge she sat in like a burnished throne

Burned on the water. The poop was beaten gold,

Purple the sails, and so perfumed that

The winds were lovesick with them. The oars were silver,

Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made

The water which they beat to follow faster,

As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,

It beggared all description: she did lie

In her pavilion—cloth-of-gold, of tissue—

O’erpicturing that Venus where we see

The fancy outwork nature. On each side her

Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,

With divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem

To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,

And what they undid did.

Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,

So many mermaids, tended her i’ th’ eyes,

And made their bends adornings. At the helm

A seeming mermaid steers. The silken tackle

Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands

That yarely frame the office. From the barge

A strange invisible perfume hits the sense

Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast

Her people out upon her; and Antony,

Enthroned i’ th’ market-place, did sit alone,

Whistling to th’ air, which but for vacancy

Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too

And made a gap in nature.

Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,

Invited her to supper. She replied

It should be better he became her guest,

Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony,

Whom ne’er the word of “No” woman heard speak,

Being barbered ten times o’er, goes to the feast,

And for his ordinary pays his heart

For what his eyes eat only.

I saw her once

Hop forty paces through the public street,

And having lost her breath, she spoke and panted,

That she did make defect perfection,

And breathless pour breath forth.

Never. He will not.

Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale

Her infinite variety. Other women cloy

The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry

Where most she satisfies. For vilest things

Become themselves in her, that the holy priests

Bless her when she is riggish.

Humbly, sir, I thank you.

No more of that. He did so.

A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.

Well,

And well am like to do, for I perceive

Four feasts are toward.

Sir,

I never loved you much, but I ha’ praised you

When you have well deserved ten times as much

As I have said you did.

At sea, I think.

You have done well by water.

I will praise any man that will praise me,

though it cannot be denied what I have done by

land.

Yes, something you can deny for your own

safety: you have been a great thief by sea.

There I deny my land service. But give me

your hand, Menas. If our eyes

had authority, here they might take two thieves

kissing.

But there is never a fair woman has a true

face.

We came hither to fight with you.

If he do, sure he cannot weep ’t back

again.

Caesar’s sister is called Octavia.

But she is now the wife of Marcus

Antonius.

’Tis true.

If I were bound to divine of this unity, I

would not prophesy so.

I think so, too. But you shall find the band

that seems to tie their friendship together will be

the very strangler of their amity. Octavia is of a holy,

cold, and still conversation.

Not he that himself is not so, which is

Mark Antony. He will to his Egyptian dish again.

Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in

Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is the

strength of their amity shall prove the immediate

author of their variance. Antony will use his affection

where it is. He married but his occasion here.

I shall take it, sir. We have used our throats

in Egypt.

Not till you have slept. I fear me

you’ll be in till then.

Here’s to thee, Menas.

There’s a strong fellow, Menas.

He bears

The third part of the world, man. Seest not?

Drink thou. Increase the reels.

Ha, my brave emperor,

Shall we dance now the Egyptian bacchanals

And celebrate our drink?

All take hands.

Make battery to our ears with the loud music,

The while I’ll place you; then the boy shall sing.

The holding every man shall beat as loud

As his strong sides can volley.

Cup us till the world go round,

Cup us till the world go round.

Take heed you fall not.  Menas, I’ll not on shore.

Hoo, says ’a! There’s my cap!

They have dispatched with Pompey; he is gone.

The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps

To part from Rome. Caesar is sad, and Lepidus,

Since Pompey’s feast, as Menas says, is troubled

With the greensickness.

A very fine one. O, how he loves Caesar!

Caesar? Why, he’s the Jupiter of men.

Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil!

Would you praise Caesar, say “Caesar.” Go no further.

But he loves Caesar best, yet he loves Antony.

Hoo, hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot

Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number—hoo!—

His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,

Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.

They are his shards and he their beetle.  So,

This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.

Will Caesar weep?

He were the worse for that were he a horse;

So is he being a man.

That year indeed he was troubled with a rheum.

What willingly he did confound he wailed,

Believe ’t, till I wept too.

How now, friend Eros?

What, man?

This is old. What is the success?

Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more,

And throw between them all the food thou hast,

They’ll grind the one the other. Where’s Antony?

Our great navy’s rigged.

’Twill be naught,

But let it be. Bring me to Antony.

But why, why, why?

Well, is it, is it?

Well, I could reply:

If we should serve with horse and mares together,

The horse were merely lost. The mares would bear

A soldier and his horse.

Your presence needs must puzzle Antony,

Take from his heart, take from his brain, from ’s time

What should not then be spared. He is already

Traduced for levity, and ’tis said in Rome

That Photinus, an eunuch, and your maids

Manage this war.

Nay, I have done.

Here comes the Emperor.

So hath my lord dared him to single fight.

Your ships are not well manned,

Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people

Engrossed by swift impress. In Caesar’s fleet

Are those that often have ’gainst Pompey fought.

Their ships are yare, yours heavy. No disgrace

Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,

Being prepared for land.

Most worthy sir, you therein throw away

The absolute soldiership you have by land,

Distract your army, which doth most consist

Of war-marked footmen, leave unexecuted

Your own renownèd knowledge, quite forgo

The way which promises assurance, and

Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard

From firm security.

Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.

Th’ Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,

With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.

To see ’t mine eyes are blasted.

What’s thy passion?

How appears the fight?

That I beheld.

Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not

Endure a further view.

Alack, alack.

Ay, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight indeed.

I’ll yet follow

The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason

Sits in the wind against me.

Think, and die.

Antony only, that would make his will

Lord of his reason. What though you fled

From that great face of war, whose several ranges

Frighted each other? Why should he follow?

The itch of his affection should not then

Have nicked his captainship, at such a point,

When half to half the world opposed, he being

The merèd question. ’Twas a shame no less

Than was his loss, to course your flying flags

And leave his navy gazing.

Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will

Unstate his happiness and be staged to th’ show

Against a sworder! I see men’s judgments are

A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward

Do draw the inward quality after them

To suffer all alike. That he should dream,

Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will

Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued

His judgment too.

Mine honesty and I begin to square.

The loyalty well held to fools does make

Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure

To follow with allegiance a fall’n lord

Does conquer him that did his master conquer,

And earns a place i’ th’ story.

He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has,

Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master

Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know

Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar’s.

To be sure of that,

I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky

That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for

Thy dearest quit thee.

You will be whipped.

’Tis better playing with a lion’s whelp

Than with an old one dying.

Now he’ll outstare the lightning. To be furious

Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood

The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still

A diminution in our captain’s brain

Restores his heart. When valor preys on reason,

It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek

Some way to leave him.

No.

He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,

He is twenty men to one.

I’ll strike and cry “Take all.”

’Tis one of those odd tricks which sorrow shoots

Out of the mind.

To make his followers weep.

What mean you, sir,

To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep,

And I, an ass, am onion-eyed. For shame,

Transform us not to women.

Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on

Affairs of Antony, there did dissuade

Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar

And leave his master Antony. For this pains,

Caesar hath hanged him. Canidius and the rest

That fell away have entertainment but

No honorable trust. I have done ill,

Of which I do accuse myself so sorely

That I will joy no more.

I give it you.

I am alone the villain of the Earth,

And feel I am so most. O Antony,

Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid

My better service, when my turpitude

Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart.

If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean

Shall outstrike thought, but thought will do ’t, I feel.

I fight against thee? No. I will go seek

Some ditch wherein to die; the foul’st best fits

My latter part of life.

O, bear me witness, night—

Be witness to me, O thou blessèd moon,

When men revolted shall upon record

Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did

Before thy face repent.

O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,

The poisonous damp of night dispunge upon me,

That life, a very rebel to my will,

May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart

Against the flint and hardness of my fault,

Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder

And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,

Nobler than my revolt is infamous,

Forgive me in thine own particular,

But let the world rank me in register

A master-leaver and a fugitive.

O Antony! O Antony!

