


You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,

It is not Caesar’s natural vice to hate

Our great competitor. From Alexandria

This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes

The lamps of night in revel, is not more manlike

Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy

More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or

Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall find there

A man who is th’ abstract of all faults

That all men follow.

You are too indulgent. Let’s grant it is not

Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy,

To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit

And keep the turn of tippling with a slave,

To reel the streets at noon and stand the buffet

With knaves that smells of sweat. Say this becomes him—

As his composure must be rare indeed

Whom these things cannot blemish—yet must Antony

No way excuse his foils when we do bear

So great weight in his lightness. If he filled

His vacancy with his voluptuousness,

Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones

Call on him for ’t. But to confound such time

That drums him from his sport and speaks as loud

As his own state and ours, ’tis to be chid

As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge,

Pawn their experience to their present pleasure

And so rebel to judgment.

I should have known no less.

It hath been taught us from the primal state

That he which is was wished until he were,

And the ebbed man, ne’er loved till ne’er worth love,

Comes feared by being lacked. This common body,

Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,

Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide

To rot itself with motion.

Antony,

Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once

Was beaten from Modena, where thou slew’st

Hirsius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel

Did famine follow, whom thou fought’st against,

Though daintily brought up, with patience more

Than savages could suffer. Thou didst drink

The stale of horses and the gilded puddle

Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did deign

The roughest berry on the rudest hedge.

Yea, like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,

The barks of trees thou browsèd. On the Alps

It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh

Which some did die to look on. And all this—

It wounds thine honor that I speak it now—

Was borne so like a soldier that thy cheek

So much as lanked not.

Let his shames quickly

Drive him to Rome. ’Tis time we twain

Did show ourselves i’ th’ field, and to that end

Assemble we immediate council. Pompey

Thrives in our idleness.

Till which encounter,

It is my business too. Farewell.

Doubt not, sir. I knew it for my bond.

I do not know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.

Welcome to Rome.

Sit.

Nay, then.

I must be laughed at

If or for nothing or a little, I

Should say myself offended, and with you

Chiefly i’ th’ world; more laughed at, that I should

Once name you derogately when to sound your name

It not concerned me.

No more than my residing here at Rome

Might be to you in Egypt. Yet if you there

Did practice on my state, your being in Egypt

Might be my question.

You may be pleased to catch at mine intent

By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother

Made wars upon me, and their contestation

Was theme for you; you were the word of war.

You praise yourself

By laying defects of judgment to me; but

You patched up your excuses.

I wrote to you

When rioting in Alexandria; you

Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts

Did gibe my missive out of audience.

You have broken

The article of your oath, which you shall never

Have tongue to charge me with.

To lend me arms and aid when I required them,

The which you both denied.

I do not much dislike the matter, but

The manner of his speech; for ’t cannot be

We shall remain in friendship, our conditions

So diff’ring in their acts. Yet if I knew

What hoop should hold us staunch, from edge to edge

O’ th’ world I would pursue it.

Speak, Agrippa.

Say not so, Agrippa.

If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof

Were well deserved of rashness.

Not till he hears how Antony is touched

With what is spoke already.

The power of Caesar, and

His power unto Octavia.

There’s my hand.

A sister I bequeath you whom no brother

Did ever love so dearly. Let her live

To join our kingdoms and our hearts; and never

Fly off our loves again.

About the Mount Misena.

Great and increasing;

But by sea he is an absolute master.

With most gladness,

And do invite you to my sister’s view,

Whither straight I’ll lead you.

Goodnight.

Most meet

That first we come to words, and therefore have we

Our written purposes before us sent,

Which if thou hast considered, let us know

If ’twill tie up thy discontented sword

And carry back to Sicily much tall youth

That else must perish here.

Take your time.

There’s the point.

And what may follow

To try a larger fortune.

That’s our offer.

Since I saw you last,

There’s a change upon you.

That’s the next to do.

Show ’s the way, sir.

Will this description satisfy

him?

I could well forbear ’t.

It’s monstrous labor when I wash my brain

And it grows fouler.

Possess it, I’ll make answer.

But I had rather fast from all, four days,

Than drink so much in one.

Cup us till the world go round,

Cup us till the world go round.

What would you more?—Pompey, goodnight.— Good brother,

Let me request you off. Our graver business

Frowns at this levity.—Gentle lords, let’s part.

You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarb

Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue

Splits what it speaks. The wild disguise hath almost

Anticked us all. What needs more words? Goodnight.

Good Antony, your hand.

You take from me a great part of myself.

Use me well in ’t.—Sister, prove such a wife

As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond

Shall pass on thy approof.—Most noble Antony,

Let not the piece of virtue which is set

Betwixt us, as the cement of our love

To keep it builded, be the ram to batter

The fortress of it. For better might we

Have loved without this mean, if on both parts

This be not cherished.

I have said.

Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well.

The elements be kind to thee and make

Thy spirits all of comfort. Fare thee well.

What, Octavia?

No, sweet Octavia,

You shall hear from me still. The time shall not

Outgo my thinking on you.

Adieu, be happy.

Farewell, farewell.

Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more

In Alexandria. Here’s the manner of ’t:

I’ th’ marketplace, on a tribunal silvered,

Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold

Were publicly enthroned. At the feet sat

Caesarion, whom they call my father’s son,

And all the unlawful issue that their lust

Since then hath made between them. Unto her

He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her

Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,

Absolute queen.

I’ th’ common showplace where they exercise.

His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings.

Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia

He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assigned

Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia. She

In th’ habiliments of the goddess Isis

That day appeared, and oft before gave audience,

As ’tis reported, so.

The people knows it and have now received

His accusations.

Caesar, and that, having in Sicily

Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him

His part o’ th’ isle. Then does he say he lent me

Some shipping, unrestored. Lastly, he frets

That Lepidus of the triumvirate

Should be deposed and, being, that we detain

All his revenue.

’Tis done already, and the messenger gone.

I have told him Lepidus was grown too cruel,

That he his high authority abused

And did deserve his change. For what I have conquered,

I grant him part; but then in his Armenia

And other of his conquered kingdoms I

Demand the like.

Nor must not then be yielded to in this.

That ever I should call thee castaway!

Why have you stol’n upon us thus? You come not

Like Caesar’s sister. The wife of Antony

Should have an army for an usher and

The neighs of horse to tell of her approach

Long ere she did appear. The trees by th’ way

Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,

Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust

Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,

Raised by your populous troops. But you are come

A market-maid to Rome, and have prevented

The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown,

Is often left unloved. We should have met you

By sea and land, supplying every stage

With an augmented greeting.

Which soon he granted,

Being an abstract ’tween his lust and him.

I have eyes upon him,

And his affairs come to me on the wind.

Where is he now?

No, my most wrongèd sister. Cleopatra

Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire

Up to a whore, who now are levying

The kings o’ th’ Earth for war. He hath assembled

Bocchus, the King of Libya; Archelaus

Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, King

Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas;

King Manchus of Arabia; King of Pont;

Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, King

Of Comagen; Polemon and Amyntas,

The Kings of Mede and Lycaonia,

With a more larger list of scepters.

Welcome hither.

Your letters did withhold our breaking forth

Till we perceived both how you were wrong led

And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart.

Be you not troubled with the time, which drives

O’er your content these strong necessities,

But let determined things to destiny

Hold unbewailed their way. Welcome to Rome,

Nothing more dear to me. You are abused

Beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods,

To do you justice, makes his ministers

Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort,

And ever welcome to us.

Most certain. Sister, welcome. Pray you

Be ever known to patience. My dear’st sister!

Taurus!

Strike not by land, keep whole. Provoke not battle

Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed

The prescript of this scroll. Our fortune lies

Upon this jump.

Let him appear that’s come from Antony.

Know you him?

Approach, and speak.

Be ’t so. Declare thine office.

For Antony,

I have no ears to his request. The Queen

Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she

From Egypt drive her all-disgracèd friend,

Or take his life there. This if she perform,

She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.

Bring him through the bands.

To try thy eloquence now ’tis time. Dispatch.

From Antony win Cleopatra. Promise,

And in our name, what she requires; add more,

From thine invention, offers. Women are not

In their best fortunes strong, but want will perjure

The ne’er-touched vestal. Try thy cunning, Thidias.

Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we

Will answer as a law.

Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,

And what thou think’st his very action speaks

In every power that moves.

He calls me “boy,” and chides as he had power

To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger

He hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal combat,

Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know

I have many other ways to die; meantime

Laugh at his challenge.

Let our best heads

Know that tomorrow the last of many battles

We mean to fight. Within our files there are,

Of those that served Mark Antony but late,

Enough to fetch him in. See it done,

And feast the army; we have store to do ’t,

And they have earned the waste. Poor Antony.

Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.

Our will is Antony be took alive;

Make it so known.

The time of universal peace is near.

Prove this a prosp’rous day, the three-nooked world

Shall bear the olive freely.

Go charge Agrippa

Plant those that have revolted in the vant

That Antony may seem to spend his fury

Upon himself.

But being charged, we will be still by land—

Which, as I take ’t, we shall, for his best force

Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,

And hold our best advantage.

Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield.

Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks

The pauses that he makes.

Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar’st

Appear thus to us?

What is ’t thou say’st?

The breaking of so great a thing should make

A greater crack. The round world

Should have shook lions into civil streets

And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony

Is not a single doom; in the name lay

A moiety of the world.

Look you sad, friends?

The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings

To wash the eyes of kings.

O Antony,

I have followed thee to this, but we do lance

Diseases in our bodies. I must perforce

Have shown to thee such a declining day

Or look on thine. We could not stall together

In the whole world. But yet let me lament

With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts

That thou my brother, my competitor

In top of all design, my mate in empire,

Friend and companion in the front of war,

The arm of mine own body, and the heart

Where mine his thoughts did kindle—that our stars

Unreconciliable should divide

Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends—

But I will tell you at some meeter season.

The business of this man looks out of him.

We’ll hear him what he says.—Whence are you?

Bid her have good heart.

She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,

How honorable and how kindly we

Determine for her. For Caesar cannot live

To be ungentle.

Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say

We purpose her no shame. Give her what comforts

The quality of her passion shall require,

Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke

She do defeat us, for her life in Rome

Would be eternal in our triumph. Go,

And with your speediest bring us what she says

And how you find of her.

Gallus, go you along. Where’s Dolabella,

To second Proculeius?

Let him alone, for I remember now

How he’s employed. He shall in time be ready.

Go with me to my tent, where you shall see

How hardly I was drawn into this war,

How calm and gentle I proceeded still

In all my writings. Go with me and see

What I can show in this.

Which is the Queen of Egypt?

Arise. You shall not kneel.

I pray you, rise. Rise, Egypt.

Take to you no hard thoughts.

The record of what injuries you did us,

Though written in our flesh, we shall remember

As things but done by chance.

Cleopatra, know

We will extenuate rather than enforce.

If you apply yourself to our intents,

Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find

A benefit in this change; but if you seek

To lay on me a cruelty by taking

Antony’s course, you shall bereave yourself

Of my good purposes, and put your children

To that destruction which I’ll guard them from

If thereon you rely. I’ll take my leave.

You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.

Nay, blush not, Cleopatra. I approve

Your wisdom in the deed.

Good queen, let us entreat you—

Forbear, Seleucus.

Cleopatra,

Not what you have reserved nor what acknowledged

Put we i’ th’ roll of conquest. Still be ’t yours!

Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe

Caesar’s no merchant to make prize with you

Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be cheered.

Make not your thoughts your prisons. No, dear queen,

For we intend so to dispose you as

Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed and sleep.

Our care and pity is so much upon you

That we remain your friend. And so adieu.

Not so. Adieu.

Bravest at the last,

She leveled at our purposes and, being royal,

Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?

I do not see them bleed.

Poisoned, then.

O, noble weakness!

If they had swallowed poison, ’twould appear

By external swelling; but she looks like sleep,

As she would catch another Antony

In her strong toil of grace.

Most probable

That so she died, for her physician tells me

She hath pursued conclusions infinite

Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed,

And bear her women from the monument.

She shall be buried by her Antony.

No grave upon the earth shall clip in it

A pair so famous. High events as these

Strike those that make them; and their story is

No less in pity than his glory which

Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall

In solemn show attend this funeral,

And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see

High order in this great solemnity.

