


In delivering my son from me, I bury a second

husband.

What hope is there of his Majesty’s

amendment?

This young gentlewoman had a father—O,

that “had,” how sad a passage ’tis!—whose skill

was almost as great as his honesty; had it stretched

so far, would have made nature immortal, and

death should have play for lack of work. Would for

the King’s sake he were living! I think it would be

the death of the King’s disease.

He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it

was his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.

His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to

my overlooking. I have those hopes of her good

that her education promises. Her dispositions she

inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where an

unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there

commendations go with pity—they are virtues and

traitors too. In her they are the better for their simpleness.

She derives her honesty and achieves her

goodness.

’Tis the best brine a maiden can season her

praise in. The remembrance of her father never

approaches her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows

takes all livelihood from her cheek.—No

more of this, Helena. Go to. No more, lest it be

rather thought you affect a sorrow than to have—

If the living be enemy to the grief, the

excess makes it soon mortal.

Be thou blessed, Bertram, and succeed thy father

In manners as in shape. Thy blood and virtue

Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness

Share with thy birthright. Love all, trust a few,

Do wrong to none. Be able for thine enemy

Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend

Under thy own life’s key Be checked for silence,

But never taxed for speech. What heaven more will,

That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,

Fall on thy head. Farewell, my lord.

’Tis an unseasoned courtier. Good my lord,

Advise him.

Heaven bless him.—Farewell, Bertram.

I will now hear. What say you of this

gentlewoman?

What does this knave here? Get

you gone, sirrah. The complaints I have heard of

you I do not all believe. ’Tis my slowness that I do

not, for I know you lack not folly to commit them

and have ability enough to make such knaveries

yours.

Well, sir.

Wilt thou needs be a beggar?

In what case?

Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.

Is this all your Worship’s reason?

May the world know them?

Thy marriage sooner than thy wickedness.

Such friends are thine enemies, knave.

Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and

calumnious knave?

Get you gone, sir. I’ll talk with you more

anon.

Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak

with her—Helen, I mean.

What, one good in ten? You corrupt the

song, sirrah.

You’ll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command

you!

Well, now.

Faith, I do. Her father bequeathed her to

me, and she herself, without other advantage, may

lawfully make title to as much love as she finds.

There is more owing her than is paid, and more

shall be paid her than she’ll demand.

You have discharged this honestly. Keep it

to yourself. Many likelihoods informed me of this

before, which hung so tott’ring in the balance that

I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you

leave me. Stall this in your bosom, and I thank you

for your honest care. I will speak with you further

anon.

Even so it was with me when I was young.

If ever we are nature’s, these are ours. This thorn

Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong.

Our blood to us, this to our blood is born.

It is the show and seal of nature’s truth,

Where love’s strong passion is impressed in youth.

By our remembrances of days foregone,

Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.

Her eye is sick on ’t, I observe her now.

You know, Helen, I am a mother to you.

Nay, a mother.

Why not a mother? When I said “a mother,”

Methought you saw a serpent. What’s in “mother”

That you start at it? I say I am your mother

And put you in the catalogue of those

That were enwombèd mine. ’Tis often seen

Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds

A native slip to us from foreign seeds.

You ne’er oppressed me with a mother’s groan,

Yet I express to you a mother’s care.

God’s mercy, maiden, does it curd thy blood

To say I am thy mother? What’s the matter,

That this distempered messenger of wet,

The many-colored Iris, rounds thine eye?

Why? That you are my daughter?

I say I am your mother.

Nor I your mother?

Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law.

God shield you mean it not! “Daughter” and “mother”

So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?

My fear hath catched your fondness! Now I see

The mystery of your loneliness and find

Your salt tears’ head. Now to all sense ’tis gross:

You love my son. Invention is ashamed

Against the proclamation of thy passion

To say thou dost not. Therefore tell me true,

But tell me then ’tis so, for, look, thy cheeks

Confess it th’ one to th’ other, and thine eyes

See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors

That in their kind they speak it. Only sin

And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue

That truth should be suspected. Speak. Is ’t so?

If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;

If it be not, forswear ’t; howe’er, I charge thee,

As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,

To tell me truly.

Do you love my son?

Love you my son?

Go not about. My love hath in ’t a bond

Whereof the world takes note. Come, come, disclose

The state of your affection, for your passions

Have to the full appeached.

Had you not lately an intent—speak truly—

To go to Paris?

Wherefore?

Tell true.

This was your motive for Paris, was it? Speak.

But think you, Helen,

If you should tender your supposèd aid,

He would receive it? He and his physicians

Are of a mind: he that they cannot help him,

They that they cannot help. How shall they credit

A poor unlearnèd virgin, when the schools

Emboweled of their doctrine have left off

The danger to itself?

Dost thou believe ’t?

Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,

Means and attendants, and my loving greetings

To those of mine in court. I’ll stay at home

And pray God’s blessing into thy attempt.

Be gone tomorrow, and be sure of this:

What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.

Come on, sir. I shall now put you to the

height of your breeding.

“To the court”? Why, what place make you

special when you put off that with such contempt?

“But to the court”?

Marry, that’s a bountiful answer that fits all

questions.

Will your answer serve fit to all questions?

Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness

for all questions?

It must be an answer of most monstrous

size that must fit all demands.

To be young again, if we could! I will be a

fool in question, hoping to be the wiser by your

answer. I pray you, sir, are you a courtier?

Sir, I am a poor friend of yours that loves

you.

I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely

meat.

You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.

Do you cry “O Lord, sir!” at your whipping,

and “spare not me”? Indeed your “O Lord, sir!” is

very sequent to your whipping. You would answer

very well to a whipping if you were but bound to ’t.

I play the noble huswife with the time to

entertain it so merrily with a fool.

An end, sir. To your business. Give Helen this,

And urge her to a present answer back.

Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.

This is not much.

Not much employment for you. You understand me.

Haste you again.

It hath happened all as I would have had it,

save that he comes not along with her.

By what observance, I pray you?

Let me see what he writes and when he

means to come.

What have we here?

I have sent you a daughter-in-law.

She hath recovered the King and undone me. I have

wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to make the

“not” eternal. You shall hear I am run away. Know it

before the report come. If there be breadth enough in

the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty to

you.

Your unfortunate son,

Bertram.

This is not well, rash and unbridled boy:

To fly the favors of so good a king,

To pluck his indignation on thy head

By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous

For the contempt of empire.

What is the matter?

Why should he be killed?

Think upon patience, pray you.—Gentlemen,

I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief

That the first face of neither on the start

Can woman me unto ’t. Where is my son, I pray you?

Brought you this letter, gentlemen?

I prithee, lady, have a better cheer.

If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,

Thou robb’st me of a moiety. He was my son,

But I do wash his name out of my blood,

And thou art all my child.—Towards Florence is he?

And to be a soldier?

Return you thither?

Find you that there?

Nothing in France until he have no wife!

There’s nothing here that is too good for him

But only she, and she deserves a lord

That twenty such rude boys might tend upon

And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?

Parolles was it not?

A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.

My son corrupts a well-derivèd nature

With his inducement.

You’re welcome, gentlemen.

I will entreat you when you see my son

To tell him that his sword can never win

The honor that he loses. More I’ll entreat you

Written to bear along.

Not so, but as we change our courtesies.

Will you draw near?

Alas! And would you take the letter of her?

Might you not know she would do as she has done

By sending me a letter? Read it again.

Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!

Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much

As letting her pass so. Had I spoke with her,

I could have well diverted her intents,

Which thus she hath prevented.

What angel shall

Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive

Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear

And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath

Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo,

To this unworthy husband of his wife.

Let every word weigh heavy of her worth

That he does weigh too light. My greatest grief,

Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.

Dispatch the most convenient messenger.

When haply he shall hear that she is gone,

He will return; and hope I may that she,

Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,

Led hither by pure love. Which of them both

Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense

To make distinction. Provide this messenger.

My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak.

Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.

I would I had not known him. It was the

death of the most virtuous gentlewoman that ever

nature had praise for creating. If she had partaken

of my flesh and cost me the dearest groans of a

mother, I could not have owed her a more rooted

love.

So he is. My lord that’s gone made himself

much sport out of him. By his authority he

remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his

sauciness, and indeed he has no pace, but runs

where he will.

With very much content, my lord, and I

wish it happily effected.

It rejoices me that, I hope, I shall see him

ere I die. I have letters that my son will be here

tonight. I shall beseech your Lordship to remain

with me till they meet together.

You need but plead your honorable

privilege.

’Tis past, my liege,

And I beseech your Majesty to make it

Natural rebellion done i’ th’ blade of youth,

When oil and fire, too strong for reason’s force,

O’erbears it and burns on.

Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless,

Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!

Son, on my life,

I have seen her wear it, and she reckoned it

At her life’s rate.

Now justice on the doers!

He blushes, and ’tis hit.

Of six preceding ancestors that gem,

Conferred by testament to th’ sequent issue,

Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife.

That ring’s a thousand proofs.

