


As I remember, Adam, it was upon this

fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand

crowns, and, as thou sayst, charged my brother on

his blessing to breed me well. And there begins my

sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and

report speaks goldenly of his profit. For my part, he

keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more

properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you

that “keeping,” for a gentleman of my birth, that

differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses are

bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their

feeding, they are taught their manage and, to that

end, riders dearly hired. But I, his brother, gain

nothing under him but growth, for the which his

animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him

as I. Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives

me, the something that nature gave me his countenance

seems to take from me. He lets me feed with

his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and, as

much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my

education. This is it, Adam, that grieves me, and the

spirit of my father, which I think is within me,

begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no

longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy

how to avoid it.

Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he

will shake me up.

Nothing. I am not taught to make anything.

Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that

which God made, a poor unworthy brother of

yours, with idleness.

Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with

them? What prodigal portion have I spent that I

should come to such penury?

O, sir, very well: here in your orchard.

Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I

know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle

condition of blood you should so know me. The

courtesy of nations allows you my better in that you

are the first-born, but the same tradition takes not

away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt

us. I have as much of my father in me as you, albeit I

confess your coming before me is nearer to his

reverence.

Come,

come, elder brother, you are too young in this.

I am no villain. I am the youngest son of Sir

Rowland de Boys. He was my father, and he is

thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains.

Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this

hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out

thy tongue for saying so. Thou hast railed on thyself.

I will not till I please. You shall hear me. My

father charged you in his will to give me good

education. You have trained me like a peasant,

obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike

qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in

me, and I will no longer endure it. Therefore allow

me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or

give me the poor allottery my father left me by

testament. With that I will go buy my fortunes.

I will no further offend you than becomes

me for my good.

I attend them with all respect and duty.

No, fair princess. He is the general challenger.

I come but in as others do, to try with him the

strength of my youth.

I beseech you, punish me not with your hard

thoughts, wherein I confess me much guilty to deny

so fair and excellent ladies anything. But let your

fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial,

wherein, if I be foiled, there is but one shamed that

was never gracious; if killed, but one dead that is

willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong, for

I have none to lament me; the world no injury, for

in it I have nothing. Only in the world I fill up a

place which may be better supplied when I have

made it empty.

Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more

modest working.

You mean to mock me after, you should not

have mocked me before. But come your ways.

Yes, I beseech your Grace. I am not yet well

breathed.

Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir

Rowland de Boys.

I am more proud to be Sir Rowland’s son,

His youngest son, and would not change that calling

To be adopted heir to Frederick.

Can I not say “I thank you”? My better parts

Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up

Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.

What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?

I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.

O poor Orlando! Thou art overthrown.

Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

I thank you, sir, and pray you tell me this:

Which of the two was daughter of the duke

That here was at the wrestling?

I rest much bounden to you. Fare you well.

Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,

From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother.

But heavenly Rosalind!

Who’s there?

Why, what’s the matter?

Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?

What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food,

Or with a base and boist’rous sword enforce

A thievish living on the common road?

This I must do, or know not what to do;

Yet this I will not do, do how I can.

I rather will subject me to the malice

Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.

O good old man, how well in thee appears

The constant service of the antique world,

When service sweat for duty, not for meed.

Thou art not for the fashion of these times,

Where none will sweat but for promotion,

And having that do choke their service up

Even with the having. It is not so with thee.

But, poor old man, thou prun’st a rotten tree

That cannot so much as a blossom yield

In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.

But come thy ways. We’ll go along together,

And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,

We’ll light upon some settled low content.

Why, how now, Adam? No greater heart in

thee? Live a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a

little. If this uncouth forest yield anything savage, I

will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee.

Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. For my

sake, be comfortable. Hold death awhile at the

arm’s end. I will here be with thee presently, and if

I bring thee not something to eat, I will give thee

leave to die. But if thou diest before I come, thou art

a mocker of my labor. Well said. Thou look’st

cheerly, and I’ll be with thee quickly. Yet thou liest

in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some

shelter, and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner if

there live anything in this desert. Cheerly, good

Adam.

Forbear, and eat no more.

Nor shalt not till necessity be served.

You touched my vein at first. The thorny point

Of bare distress hath ta’en from me the show

Of smooth civility, yet am I inland bred

And know some nurture. But forbear, I say.

He dies that touches any of this fruit

Till I and my affairs are answerèd.

I almost die for food, and let me have it.

Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you.

I thought that all things had been savage here,

And therefore put I on the countenance

Of stern commandment. But whate’er you are

That in this desert inaccessible,

Under the shade of melancholy boughs,

Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time,

If ever you have looked on better days,

If ever been where bells have knolled to church,

If ever sat at any good man’s feast,

If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear

And know what ’tis to pity and be pitied,

Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,

In the which hope I blush and hide my sword.

Then but forbear your food a little while

Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn

And give it food. There is an old poor man

Who after me hath many a weary step

Limped in pure love. Till he be first sufficed,

Oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger,

I will not touch a bit.

I thank you; and be blessed for your good comfort.

I thank you most for him.

Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love.

And thou, thrice-crownèd queen of night, survey

With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,

Thy huntress’ name that my full life doth sway.

O Rosalind, these trees shall be my books,

And in their barks my thoughts I’ll character,

That every eye which in this forest looks

Shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere.

Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree

The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.

And so had I, but yet, for fashion sake, I

thank you too for your society.

I do desire we may be better strangers.

I pray you mar no more of my verses with

reading them ill-favoredly.

Yes, just.

There was no thought of pleasing you when

she was christened.

Just as high as my heart.

Not so. But I answer you right painted cloth,

from whence you have studied your questions.

I will chide no breather in the world but

myself, against whom I know most faults.

’Tis a fault I will not change for your best

virtue. I am weary of you.

He is drowned in the brook. Look but in, and

you shall see him.

Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

I am glad of your departure. Adieu, good

Monsieur Melancholy.

Very well. What would you?

You should ask me what time o’ day. There’s

no clock in the forest.

And why not the swift foot of time? Had not

that been as proper?

I prithee, who doth he trot withal?

Who ambles time withal?

Who doth he gallop withal?

Who stays it still withal?

Where dwell you, pretty youth?

Are you native of this place?

Your accent is something finer than you

could purchase in so removed a dwelling.

Can you remember any of the principal evils

that he laid to the charge of women?

I prithee recount some of them.

I am he that is so love-shaked. I pray you tell

me your remedy.

What were his marks?

Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe

I love.

I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of

Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.

Neither rhyme nor reason can express how

much.

Did you ever cure any so?

I would not be cured, youth.

Now, by the faith of my love, I will. Tell me

where it is.

With all my heart, good youth.

Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind.

My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of

my promise.

Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

Of a snail?

What’s that?

Virtue is no hornmaker, and my Rosalind is

virtuous.

I would kiss before I spoke.

How if the kiss be denied?

Who could be out, being before his beloved

mistress?

What, of my suit?

I take some joy to say you are because I

would be talking of her.

Then, in mine own person I die.

I would not have my right Rosalind of this

mind, for I protest her frown might kill me.

Then love me, Rosalind.

And wilt thou have me?

What sayest thou?

I hope so.

Pray thee marry us.

I will.

Why now, as fast as she can marry us.

I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

So do all thoughts. They are winged.

Forever and a day.

But will my Rosalind do so?

O, but she is wise.

A man that had a wife with such a wit, he

might say “Wit, whither wilt?”

And what wit could wit have to excuse that?

For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave

thee.

I must attend the Duke at dinner. By two

o’clock I will be with thee again.

Ay, sweet Rosalind.

With no less religion than if thou wert indeed

my Rosalind. So, adieu.

Is ’t possible that on so little acquaintance

you should like her? That, but seeing, you should

love her? And loving, woo? And wooing, she should

grant? And will you persever to enjoy her?

You have my consent. Let your wedding be

tomorrow. Thither will I invite the Duke and all ’s

contented followers. Go you and prepare Aliena,

for, look you, here comes my Rosalind.

It is my arm.

Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.

Ay, and greater wonders than that.

They shall be married tomorrow, and I will

bid the Duke to the nuptial. But O, how bitter a

thing it is to look into happiness through another

man’s eyes. By so much the more shall I tomorrow

be at the height of heart-heaviness by how much I

shall think my brother happy in having what he

wishes for.

I can live no longer by thinking.

Speak’st thou in sober meanings?

And I for Rosalind.

And I for Rosalind.

And so am I for Rosalind.

If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.

Nor I.

I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not,

As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

My lord, the first time that I ever saw him

Methought he was a brother to your daughter.

But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born

And hath been tutored in the rudiments

Of many desperate studies by his uncle,

Whom he reports to be a great magician

Obscurèd in the circle of this forest.

If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

