


O Corin, that thou knew’st how I do love her!

No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,

Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover

As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow.

But if thy love were ever like to mine—

As sure I think did never man love so—

How many actions most ridiculous

Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?

O, thou didst then never love so heartily.

If thou rememb’rest not the slightest folly

That ever love did make thee run into,

Thou hast not loved.

Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,

Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress’ praise,

Thou hast not loved.

Or if thou hast not broke from company

Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,

Thou hast not loved.

O Phoebe, Phoebe, Phoebe!

Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me. Do not, Phoebe.

Say that you love me not, but say not so

In bitterness. The common executioner,

Whose heart th’ accustomed sight of death makes hard,

Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck

But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be

Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

O dear Phoebe,

If ever—as that ever may be near—

You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,

Then shall you know the wounds invisible

That love’s keen arrows make.

Sweet Phoebe—

Sweet Phoebe, pity me.

Wherever sorrow is, relief would be.

If you do sorrow at my grief in love,

By giving love your sorrow and my grief

Were both extermined.

I would have you.

So holy and so perfect is my love,

And I in such a poverty of grace,

That I shall think it a most plenteous crop

To glean the broken ears after the man

That the main harvest reaps. Loose now and then

A scattered smile, and that I’ll live upon.

Not very well, but I have met him oft,

And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds

That the old carlot once was master of.

Phoebe, with all my heart.

My errand is to you, fair youth.

My gentle Phoebe did bid me give you this.

I know not the contents, but as I guess

By the stern brow and waspish action

Which she did use as she was writing of it,

It bears an angry tenor. Pardon me.

I am but as a guiltless messenger.

No, I protest. I know not the contents.

Phoebe did write it.

Sure it is hers.

So please you, for I never heard it yet,

Yet heard too much of Phoebe’s cruelty.

Call you this railing?

Call you this chiding?

It is to be all made of sighs and tears,

And so am I for Phoebe.

It is to be all made of faith and service,

And so am I for Phoebe.

It is to be all made of fantasy,

All made of passion and all made of wishes,

All adoration, duty, and observance,

All humbleness, all patience and impatience,

All purity, all trial, all observance,

And so am I for Phoebe.

If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

I’ll not fail, if I live.

Though to have her and death were both one thing.

