


I pray you, daughter, sing, or express yourself

in a more comfortable sort. If my son were my

husband, I should freelier rejoice in that absence

wherein he won honor than in the embracements

of his bed where he would show most love. When

yet he was but tender-bodied and the only son of

my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked

all gaze his way, when for a day of kings’ entreaties

a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding,

I, considering how honor would become

such a person—that it was no better than picture-like

to hang by th’ wall, if renown made it not

stir—was pleased to let him seek danger where he

was like to find fame. To a cruel war I sent him,

from whence he returned, his brows bound with

oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not more in joy

at first hearing he was a man-child than now in

first seeing he had proved himself a man.

Then his good report should have been my

son; I therein would have found issue. Hear me

profess sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my

love alike and none less dear than thine and my

good Martius, I had rather had eleven die nobly

for their country than one voluptuously surfeit out

of action.

Indeed you shall not.

Methinks I hear hither your husband’s drum,

See him pluck Aufidius down by th’ hair;

As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him.

Methinks I see him stamp thus and call thus:

“Come on, you cowards! You were got in fear,

Though you were born in Rome.” His bloody brow

With his mailed hand then wiping, forth he goes

Like to a harvestman that’s tasked to mow

Or all or lose his hire.

Away, you fool! It more becomes a man

Than gilt his trophy. The breasts of Hecuba,

When she did suckle Hector, looked not lovelier

Than Hector’s forehead when it spit forth blood

At Grecian sword, contemning.—Tell Valeria

We are fit to bid her welcome.

He’ll beat Aufidius’ head below his knee

And tread upon his neck.

Sweet madam.

He had rather see the swords and hear a

drum than look upon his schoolmaster.

One on ’s father’s moods.

She shall, she shall.

Why, I pray you?

Let her alone, lady. As she is now, she will

but disease our better mirth.

Honorable Menenius, my boy Martius approaches.

For the love of Juno, let’s go!

Ay, worthy Menenius, and with most prosperous

approbation.

Look, here’s a letter from him.

The state hath another, his wife another,

and I think there’s one at home for you.

O, he is wounded, I thank the gods for ’t.

On ’s brows, Menenius. He comes the third

time home with the oaken garland.

Titus Lartius writes they fought together,

but Aufidius got off.

Good ladies, let’s go.—Yes, yes, yes. The

Senate has letters from the General, wherein he

gives my son the whole name of the war. He hath

in this action outdone his former deeds doubly.

True? Pow waw!

I’ th’ shoulder and i’ th’ left arm. There will

be large cicatrices to show the people when he

shall stand for his place. He received in the repulse

of Tarquin seven hurts i’ th’ body.

He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five

wounds upon him.

These are the ushers of Martius: before him

he carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears.

Death, that dark spirit, in ’s nervy arm doth lie,

Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.

Welcome to Rome, renownèd Coriolanus!

Nay, my good soldier, up.

My gentle Martius, worthy Caius, and

By deed-achieving honor newly named—

What is it? Coriolanus must I call thee?

But, O, thy wife—

I know not where to turn. O, welcome home!—

And, welcome, general.—And you’re welcome all.

I have lived

To see inherited my very wishes

And the buildings of my fancy. Only

There’s one thing wanting, which I doubt not but

Our Rome will cast upon thee.

O sir, sir, sir,

I would have had you put your power well on

Before you had worn it out.

You might have been enough the man you are

With striving less to be so. Lesser had been

The thwartings of your dispositions if

You had not showed them how you were disposed

Ere they lacked power to cross you.

Ay, and burn too.

Pray be counseled.

I have a heart as little apt as yours,

But yet a brain that leads my use of anger

To better vantage.

You are too absolute,

Though therein you can never be too noble

But when extremities speak. I have heard you say

Honor and policy, like unsevered friends,

I’ th’ war do grow together. Grant that, and tell me

In peace what each of them by th’ other lose

That they combine not there?

If it be honor in your wars to seem

The same you are not, which for your best ends

You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse

That it shall hold companionship in peace

With honor as in war, since that to both

It stands in like request?

Because that now it lies you on to speak

To th’ people, not by your own instruction,

Nor by th’ matter which your heart prompts you,

But with such words that are but roted in

Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables

Of no allowance to your bosom’s truth.

Now, this no more dishonors you at all

Than to take in a town with gentle words,

Which else would put you to your fortune and

The hazard of much blood.

I would dissemble with my nature where

My fortunes and my friends at stake required

I should do so in honor. I am in this

Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;

And you will rather show our general louts

How you can frown than spend a fawn upon ’em

For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard

Of what that want might ruin.

I prithee now, my son,

Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,

And thus far having stretched it—here be with them—

Thy knee bussing the stones—for in such business

Action is eloquence, and the eyes of th’ ignorant

More learnèd than the ears—waving thy head,

Which often thus correcting thy stout heart,

Now humble as the ripest mulberry

That will not hold the handling. Or say to them

Thou art their soldier and, being bred in broils,

Hast not the soft way, which thou dost confess

Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,

In asking their good loves; but thou wilt frame

Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far

As thou hast power and person.

Prithee now,

Go, and be ruled; although I know thou hadst rather

Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf

Than flatter him in a bower.    Here is Cominius.

He must, and will.—

Prithee, now, say you will, and go about it.

I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said

My praises made thee first a soldier, so,

To have my praise for this, perform a part

Thou hast not done before.

At thy choice, then.

To beg of thee, it is my more dishonor

Than thou of them. Come all to ruin. Let

Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear

Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death

With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list.

Thy valiantness was mine; thou suck’st it from me,

But owe thy pride thyself.

Do your will.

Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,

And occupations perish!

My first son,

Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius

With thee awhile. Determine on some course

More than a wild exposure to each chance

That starts i’ th’ way before thee.

O, you’re well met. The hoarded plague o’ th’ gods

Requite your love!

If that I could for weeping, you should hear—

Nay, and you shall hear some. Will you be gone?

Ay, fool, is that a shame? Note but this, fool.

Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship

To banish him that struck more blows for Rome

Than thou hast spoken words?

More noble blows than ever thou wise words,

And for Rome’s good. I’ll tell thee what—yet go.

Nay, but thou shalt stay too. I would my son

Were in Arabia and thy tribe before him,

His good sword in his hand.

Bastards and all.

Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!

“I would he had”? ’Twas you incensed the rabble.

Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth

As I can of those mysteries which heaven

Will not have Earth to know.

Now, pray, sir, get you gone.

You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:

As far as doth the Capitol exceed

The meanest house in Rome, so far my son—

This lady’s husband here, this, do you see?—

Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.

Take my prayers with you.

I would the gods had nothing else to do

But to confirm my curses. Could I meet ’em

But once a day, it would unclog my heart

Of what lies heavy to ’t.

Anger’s my meat. I sup upon myself

And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let’s go.

Leave this faint puling, and lament as I do,

In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.

O, stand up blest,

Whilst with no softer cushion than the flint

I kneel before thee and unproperly

Show duty, as mistaken all this while

Between the child and parent.

Thou art my warrior;

I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?

This is a poor epitome of yours,

Which by th’ interpretation of full time

May show like all yourself.

Your knee, sirrah.

Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself

Are suitors to you.

O, no more, no more!

You have said you will not grant us anything;

For we have nothing else to ask but that

Which you deny already. Yet we will ask,

That if you fail in our request, the blame

May hang upon your hardness. Therefore hear us.

Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment

And state of bodies would bewray what life

We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself

How more unfortunate than all living women

Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which should

Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts,

Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow,

Making the mother, wife, and child to see

The son, the husband, and the father tearing

His country’s bowels out. And to poor we

Thine enmity’s most capital. Thou barr’st us

Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort

That all but we enjoy. For how can we—

Alas, how can we—for our country pray,

Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,

Whereto we are bound? Alack, or we must lose

The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,

Our comfort in the country. We must find

An evident calamity, though we had

Our wish, which side should win, for either thou

Must as a foreign recreant be led

With manacles through our streets, or else

Triumphantly tread on thy country’s ruin

And bear the palm for having bravely shed

Thy wife and children’s blood. For myself, son,

I purpose not to wait on fortune till

These wars determine. If I cannot persuade thee

Rather to show a noble grace to both parts

Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner

March to assault thy country than to tread—

Trust to ’t, thou shalt not—on thy mother’s womb

That brought thee to this world.

Nay, go not from us thus.

If it were so, that our request did tend

To save the Romans, thereby to destroy

The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us

As poisonous of your honor. No, our suit

Is that you reconcile them, while the Volsces

May say “This mercy we have showed,” the Romans

“This we received,” and each in either side

Give the all-hail to thee and cry “Be blest

For making up this peace!” Thou know’st, great son,

The end of war’s uncertain, but this certain,

That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit

Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name

Whose repetition will be dogged with curses,

Whose chronicle thus writ: “The man was noble,

But with his last attempt he wiped it out,

Destroyed his country, and his name remains

To th’ ensuing age abhorred.” Speak to me, son.

Thou hast affected the fine strains of honor

To imitate the graces of the gods,

To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o’ th’ air

And yet to charge thy sulfur with a bolt

That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?

Think’st thou it honorable for a noble man

Still to remember wrongs?—Daughter, speak you.

He cares not for your weeping.—Speak thou, boy.

Perhaps thy childishness will move him more

Than can our reasons.—There’s no man in the world

More bound to ’s mother, yet here he lets me prate

Like one i’ th’ stocks. Thou hast never in thy life

Showed thy dear mother any courtesy

When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,

Has clucked thee to the wars and safely home,

Loaden with honor. Say my request’s unjust

And spurn me back; but if it be not so,

Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee

That thou restrain’st from me the duty which

To a mother’s part belongs.—He turns away.—

Down, ladies! Let us shame him with our knees.

To his surname Coriolanus ’longs more pride

Than pity to our prayers. Down! An end.

This is the last. So, we will home to Rome

And die among our neighbors.—Nay, behold ’s.

This boy that cannot tell what he would have,

But kneels and holds up hands for fellowship,

Does reason our petition with more strength

Than thou hast to deny ’t.—Come, let us go.

This fellow had a Volscian to his mother,

His wife is in Corioles, and his child

Like him by chance.—Yet give us our dispatch.

I am hushed until our city be afire,

And then I’ll speak a little.

