


What fellow’s this?

What have you to do here, fellow?

Pray you, avoid the house.

What are you?

A marv’llous poor one.

Pray you, poor gentleman, take up

some other station. Here’s no place for you. Pray

you, avoid. Come.

What, you will not?—Prithee, tell

my master what a strange guest he has here.

Where dwell’st thou?

Under the canopy?

Where’s that?

I’ th’ city of kites and crows? What

an ass it is! Then thou dwell’st with daws too?

How, sir? Do you meddle with my

master?

O slaves, I can tell you news, news,

you rascals!

I would not be a Roman, of all nations;

I had as lief be a condemned man.

Why, here’s he that was wont to

thwack our general, Caius Martius.

I do not say “thwack our general,”

but he was always good enough for him.

Why, he is so made on here within

as if he were son and heir to Mars; set at upper end

o’ th’ table; no question asked him by any of the

senators but they stand bald before him. Our general

himself makes a mistress of him, sanctifies

himself with ’s hand, and turns up the white o’ th’

eye to his discourse. But the bottom of the news is,

our general is cut i’ th’ middle and but one half of

what he was yesterday, for the other has half, by

the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He’ll go,

he says, and sowl the porter of Rome gates by th’

ears. He will mow all down before him and leave

his passage polled.

Do ’t? He will do ’t! For, look you,

sir, he has as many friends as enemies, which

friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show

themselves, as we term it, his friends whilest he’s

in directitude.

But when they shall see, sir, his

crest up again, and the man in blood, they will out

of their burrows like coneys after rain, and revel

all with him.

Tomorrow, today, presently. You

shall have the drum struck up this afternoon. ’Tis,

as it were, a parcel of their feast, and to be executed

ere they wipe their lips.

Reason: because they then less

need one another. The wars for my money! I hope

to see Romans as cheap as Volscians.

They are rising; they are rising.

