
Is it not yours?

Whatever have been thought on in this state

That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome

Had circumvention? ’Tis not four days gone

Since I heard thence. These are the words—I think

I have the letter here. Yes, here it is.

They have pressed a power, but it is not known

Whether for east or west. The dearth is great.

The people mutinous; and, it is rumored,

Cominius, Martius your old enemy,

Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,

And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,

These three lead on this preparation

Whither ’tis bent. Most likely ’tis for you.

Consider of it.

Nor did you think it folly

To keep your great pretenses veiled till when

They needs must show themselves, which, in the hatching,

It seemed, appeared to Rome. By the discovery

We shall be shortened in our aim, which was

To take in many towns ere almost Rome

Should know we were afoot.

O, doubt not that;

I speak from certainties. Nay, more,

Some parcels of their power are forth already,

And only hitherward. I leave your Honors.

If we and Caius Martius chance to meet,

’Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike

Till one can do no more.

And keep your Honors safe!

We hate alike.

Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor

More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.

If I fly, Martius,

Hollo me like a hare.

Wert thou the Hector

That was the whip of your bragged progeny,

Thou shouldst not scape me here.

Officious and not valiant, you have shamed me

In your condemnèd seconds.

The town is ta’en.

Condition?

I would I were a Roman, for I cannot,

Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition?

What good condition can a treaty find

I’ th’ part that is at mercy? Five times, Martius,

I have fought with thee; so often hast thou beat me

And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter

As often as we eat. By th’ elements,

If e’er again I meet him beard to beard,

He’s mine, or I am his. Mine emulation

Hath not that honor in ’t it had; for where

I thought to crush him in an equal force,

True sword to sword, I’ll potch at him some way

Or wrath or craft may get him.

Bolder, though not so subtle. My valor’s poisoned

With only suff’ring stain by him; for him

Shall fly out of itself. Nor sleep nor sanctuary,

Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,

The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,

Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up

Their rotten privilege and custom ’gainst

My hate to Martius. Where I find him, were it

At home, upon my brother’s guard, even there,

Against the hospitable canon, would I

Wash my fierce hand in ’s heart. Go you to th’ city;

Learn how ’tis held and what they are that must

Be hostages for Rome.

I am attended at the cypress grove. I pray you—

’Tis south the city mills—bring me word thither

How the world goes, that to the pace of it

I may spur on my journey.

Where is this fellow?

Whence com’st thou? What wouldst thou?

Thy name? Why speak’st not? Speak, man. What’s

thy name?

What is thy name?

Say, what’s thy name?

Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face

Bears a command in ’t. Though thy tackle’s torn,

Thou show’st a noble vessel. What’s thy name?

I know thee not. Thy name?

O Martius, Martius,

Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart

A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter

Should from yond cloud speak divine things

And say ’tis true, I’d not believe them more

Than thee, all-noble Martius. Let me twine

Mine arms about that body, whereagainst

My grainèd ash an hundred times hath broke

And scarred the moon with splinters.  Here I clip

The anvil of my sword and do contest

As hotly and as nobly with thy love

As ever in ambitious strength I did

Contend against thy valor. Know thou first,

I loved the maid I married; never man

Sighed truer breath. But that I see thee here,

Thou noble thing, more dances my rapt heart

Than when I first my wedded mistress saw

Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars, I tell thee

We have a power on foot, and I had purpose

Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn

Or lose mine arm for ’t. Thou hast beat me out

Twelve several times, and I have nightly since

Dreamt of encounters ’twixt thyself and me;

We have been down together in my sleep,

Unbuckling helms, fisting each other’s throat,

And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Martius,

Had we no other quarrel else to Rome but that

Thou art thence banished, we would muster all

From twelve to seventy and, pouring war

Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,

Like a bold flood o’erbear ’t. O, come, go in,

And take our friendly senators by th’ hands,

Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,

Who am prepared against your territories,

Though not for Rome itself.

Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have

The leading of thine own revenges, take

Th’ one half of my commission and set down—

As best thou art experienced, since thou know’st

Thy country’s strength and weakness—thine own ways,

Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,

Or rudely visit them in parts remote

To fright them ere destroy. But come in.

Let me commend thee first to those that shall

Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!

And more a friend than ere an enemy—

Yet, Martius, that was much. Your hand. Most welcome!

Do they still fly to th’ Roman?

I cannot help it now,

Unless by using means I lame the foot

Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,

Even to my person, than I thought he would

When first I did embrace him. Yet his nature

In that’s no changeling, and I must excuse

What cannot be amended.

I understand thee well, and be thou sure,

When he shall come to his account, he knows not

What I can urge against him, although it seems,

And so he thinks and is no less apparent

To th’ vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly,

And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,

Fights dragonlike, and does achieve as soon

As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone

That which shall break his neck or hazard mine

Whene’er we come to our account.

All places yields to him ere he sits down,

And the nobility of Rome are his;

The Senators and Patricians love him too.

The Tribunes are no soldiers, and their people

Will be as rash in the repeal as hasty

To expel him thence. I think he’ll be to Rome

As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it

By sovereignty of nature. First, he was

A noble servant to them, but he could not

Carry his honors even. Whether ’twas pride,

Which out of daily fortune ever taints

The happy man; whether defect of judgment,

To fail in the disposing of those chances

Which he was lord of; or whether nature,

Not to be other than one thing, not moving

From th’ casque to th’ cushion, but commanding peace

Even with the same austerity and garb

As he controlled the war; but one of these—

As he hath spices of them all—not all,

For I dare so far free him—made him feared,

So hated, and so banished. But he has a merit

To choke it in the utt’rance. So our virtues

Lie in th’ interpretation of the time,

And power, unto itself most commendable,

Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair

T’ extol what it hath done.

One fire drives out one fire, one nail one nail;

Rights by rights falter; strengths by strengths do fail.

Come, let’s away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,

Thou art poor’st of all; then shortly art thou mine.

You keep a constant temper.

Only their ends

You have respected, stopped your ears against

The general suit of Rome, never admitted

A private whisper, no, not with such friends

That thought them sure of you.

I was moved withal.

I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy honor

At difference in thee. Out of that I’ll work

Myself a former fortune.

Go tell the lords o’ th’ city I am here.

Deliver them this paper. Having read it,

Bid them repair to th’ marketplace, where I,

Even in theirs and in the commons’ ears,

Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse

The city ports by this hath entered and

Intends t’ appear before the people, hoping

To purge himself with words. Dispatch.     Most welcome!

Even so

As with a man by his own alms empoisoned

And with his charity slain.

Sir, I cannot tell.

We must proceed as we do find the people.

I know it,

And my pretext to strike at him admits

A good construction. I raised him, and I pawned

Mine honor for his truth, who, being so heightened,

He watered his new plants with dews of flattery,

Seducing so my friends; and to this end,

He bowed his nature, never known before

But to be rough, unswayable, and free.

That I would have spoke of.

Being banished for ’t, he came unto my hearth,

Presented to my knife his throat. I took him,

Made him joint servant with me, gave him way

In all his own desires; nay, let him choose

Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,

My best and freshest men; served his designments

In mine own person; holp to reap the fame

Which he did end all his; and took some pride

To do myself this wrong; till at the last

I seemed his follower, not partner; and

He waged me with his countenance as if

I had been mercenary.

There was it

For which my sinews shall be stretched upon him.

At a few drops of women’s rheum, which are

As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labor

Of our great action. Therefore shall he die,

And I’ll renew me in his fall. But hark!

Say no more.

Here come the lords.

I have not deserved it.

But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused

What I have written to you?

He approaches. You shall hear him.

Read it not, noble lords,

But tell the traitor in the highest degree

He hath abused your powers.

Ay, traitor, Martius.

Ay, Martius, Caius Martius. Dost thou think

I’ll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol’n name

Coriolanus, in Corioles?

You lords and heads o’ th’ state, perfidiously

He has betrayed your business and given up

For certain drops of salt your city Rome—

I say your city—to his wife and mother,

Breaking his oath and resolution like

A twist of rotten silk, never admitting

Counsel o’ th’ war, but at his nurse’s tears

He whined and roared away your victory,

That pages blushed at him and men of heart

Looked wond’ring each at other.

Name not the god, thou boy of tears.

No more.

Why, noble lords,

Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,

Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,

’Fore your own eyes and ears?

Insolent villain!

My noble masters, hear me speak.

My lords, when you shall know—as in this rage,

Provoked by him, you cannot—the great danger

Which this man’s life did owe you, you’ll rejoice

That he is thus cut off. Please it your Honors

To call me to your senate, I’ll deliver

Myself your loyal servant or endure

Your heaviest censure.

My rage is gone,

And I am struck with sorrow.—Take him up.

Help, three o’ th’ chiefest soldiers; I’ll be one.—

Beat thou the drum that it speak mournfully.—

Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he

Hath widowed and unchilded many a one,

Which to this hour bewail the injury,

Yet he shall have a noble memory.

Assist.

