


My lord your son drew on my master.

There might have been,

But that my master rather played than fought

And had no help of anger. They were parted

By gentlemen at hand.

On his command. He would not suffer me

To bring him to the haven, left these notes

Of what commands I should be subject to

When ’t pleased you to employ me.

I humbly thank your Highness.

It was his queen, his queen!

And kissed it, madam.

No, madam. For so long

As he could make me with this eye or ear

Distinguish him from others, he did keep

The deck, with glove or hat or handkerchief

Still waving, as the fits and stirs of ’s mind

Could best express how slow his soul sailed on,

How swift his ship.

Madam, so I did.

Be assured, madam,

With his next vantage.

Madam, I shall.

And shall do.

But when to my good lord I prove untrue,

I’ll choke myself; there’s all I’ll do for you.

Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome

Comes from my lord with letters.

I was going, sir,

To give him welcome.

’Twill not be lost.

How? Of adultery? Wherefore write you not

What monsters her accuse? Leonatus,

O master, what a strange infection

Is fall’n into thy ear! What false Italian,

As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevailed

On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal? No.

She’s punished for her truth and undergoes,

More goddesslike than wifelike, such assaults

As would take in some virtue. O my master,

Thy mind to her is now as low as were

Thy fortunes. How? That I should murder her,

Upon the love and truth and vows which I

Have made to thy command? I her? Her blood?

If it be so to do good service, never

Let me be counted serviceable. How look I

That I should seem to lack humanity

So much as this fact comes to? Do ’t! The letter

That I have sent her, by her own command

Shall give thee opportunity. O damned paper,

Black as the ink that’s on thee! Senseless bauble,

Art thou a fedary for this act, and look’st

So virginlike without? Lo, here she comes.

I am ignorant in what I am commanded.

Madam, here is a letter from my lord.

One score ’twixt sun and sun,

Madam, ’s enough for you, and too much too.

Madam, you’re best consider.

Please you read,

And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing

The most disdained of fortune.

What shall I need to draw my sword? The paper

Hath cut her throat already. No, ’tis slander,

Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue

Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath

Rides on the posting winds and doth belie

All corners of the world. Kings, queens, and states,

Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave

This viperous slander enters.—What cheer, madam?

Alas, good lady!

Good madam, hear me.

Hence, vile instrument!

Thou shalt not damn my hand.

O gracious lady,

Since I received command to do this business

I have not slept one wink.

I’ll wake mine eyeballs out first.

But to win time

To lose so bad employment, in the which

I have considered of a course. Good lady,

Hear me with patience.

Then, madam,

I thought you would not back again.

Not so, neither.

But if I were as wise as honest, then

My purpose would prove well. It cannot be

But that my master is abused. Some villain,

Ay, and singular in his art, hath done

You both this cursèd injury.

No, on my life.

I’ll give but notice you are dead, and send him

Some bloody sign of it, for ’tis commanded

I should do so. You shall be missed at court,

And that will well confirm it.

If you’ll back to th’ court—

If not at court,

Then not in Britain must you bide.

I am most glad

You think of other place. Th’ ambassador,

Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford Haven

Tomorrow. Now, if you could wear a mind

Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise

That which t’ appear itself must not yet be

But by self-danger, you should tread a course

Pretty and full of view: yea, haply near

The residence of Posthumus; so nigh, at least,

That though his actions were not visible, yet

Report should render him hourly to your ear

As truly as he moves.

Well then, here’s the point:

You must forget to be a woman; change

Command into obedience, fear and niceness—

The handmaids of all women, or, more truly,

Woman it pretty self—into a waggish courage,

Ready in gibes, quick-answered, saucy, and

As quarrelous as the weasel. Nay, you must

Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek,

Exposing it—but O, the harder heart!

Alack, no remedy—to the greedy touch

Of common-kissing Titan, and forget

Your laborsome and dainty trims, wherein

You made great Juno angry.

First, make yourself but like one.

Forethinking this, I have already fit—

’Tis in my cloakbag—doublet, hat, hose, all

That answer to them. Would you, in their serving,

And with what imitation you can borrow

From youth of such a season, ’fore noble Lucius

Present yourself, desire his service, tell him

Wherein you’re happy—which will make him know,

If that his head have ear in music—doubtless

With joy he will embrace you, for he’s honorable

And, doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad:

You have me, rich, and I will never fail

Beginning nor supplyment.

Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,

Lest, being missed, I be suspected of

Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,

Here is a box. I had it from the Queen.

What’s in ’t is precious. If you are sick at sea

Or stomach-qualmed at land, a dram of this

Will drive away distemper. To some shade,

And fit you to your manhood. May the gods

Direct you to the best.

O, good my lord—

Alas, my lord,

How can she be with him? When was she missed?

He is in Rome.

O, my all-worthy lord!

Then, sir,

This paper is the history of my knowledge

Touching her flight.

Or this or perish.

She’s far enough, and what he learns by this

May prove his travail, not her danger.

I’ll write to my lord she’s dead. O Imogen,

Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!

Sir, as I think.

Well, my good lord.

Sir, I will.

I have, my lord, at my lodging the same suit he

wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.

I shall, my lord.

Ay, my noble lord.

She can scarce be there yet.

Thou bidd’st me to my loss, for true to thee

Were to prove false, which I will never be,

To him that is most true. To Milford go,

And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow,

You heavenly blessings, on her. This fool’s speed

Be crossed with slowness. Labor be his meed.

Sir, my life is yours.

I humbly set it at your will. But for my mistress,

I nothing know where she remains, why gone,

Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your Highness,

Hold me your loyal servant.

I heard no letter from my master since

I wrote him Imogen was slain. ’Tis strange.

Nor hear I from my mistress, who did promise

To yield me often tidings. Neither know I

What is betid to Cloten, but remain

Perplexed in all. The heavens still must work.

Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true.

These present wars shall find I love my country,

Even to the note o’ th’ King, or I’ll fall in them.

All other doubts, by time let them be cleared.

Fortune brings in some boats that are not steered.

He hath been searched among the dead and living,

But no trace of him.

It is my mistress!

Since she is living, let the time run on

To good or bad.

O, gentlemen, help!—

Mine and your mistress! O my lord Posthumus,

You ne’er killed Imogen till now! Help, help!

Mine honored lady—

Wake, my mistress.

How fares my mistress?

Lady, the gods throw stones of sulfur on me if

That box I gave you was not thought by me

A precious thing. I had it from the Queen.

My lord,

Now fear is from me, I’ll speak truth. Lord Cloten,

Upon my lady’s missing, came to me

With his sword drawn, foamed at the mouth, and swore,

If I discovered not which way she was gone,

It was my instant death. By accident,

I had a feignèd letter of my master’s

Then in my pocket, which directed him

To seek her on the mountains near to Milford;

Where, in a frenzy, in my master’s garments,

Which he enforced from me, away he posts

With unchaste purpose and with oath to violate

My lady’s honor. What became of him

I further know not.

