
Hail, heaven!

What should we speak of

When we are old as you? When we shall hear

The rain and wind beat dark December, how

In this our pinching cave shall we discourse

The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing.

We are beastly: subtle as the fox for prey,

Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat.

Our valor is to chase what flies. Our cage

We make a choir, as doth the prisoned bird,

And sing our bondage freely.

I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.

All gold and silver rather turn to dirt,

As ’tis no better reckoned but of those

Who worship dirty gods.

I’ll make ’t my comfort

He is a man. I’ll love him as my brother.—

And such a welcome as I’d give to him

After long absence, such is yours. Most welcome.

Be sprightly, for you fall ’mongst friends.

Or I, whate’er it be,

What pain it cost, what danger. Gods!

The night to th’ owl and morn to th’ lark less welcome.

I pray, draw near.

Brother, stay here.

Are we not brothers?

If it be sin to say so, sir, I yoke me

In my good brother’s fault. I know not why

I love this youth, and I have heard you say

Love’s reason’s without reason. The bier at door,

And a demand who is ’t shall die, I’d say

“My father, not this youth.”

Brother, farewell.

You health.—So please you, sir.

Thus did he answer me, yet said hereafter

I might know more.

We’ll not be long away.

How angel-like he sings!

Nobly he yokes

A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh

Was that it was for not being such a smile,

The smile mocking the sigh that it would fly

From so divine a temple to commix

With winds that sailors rail at.

Grow, patience,

And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine

His perishing root with the increasing vine!

None in the world. You did mistake him sure.

In this place we left them.

I wish my brother make good time with him,

You say he is so fell.

Let ord’nance

Come as the gods foresay it. Howsoe’er,

My brother hath done well.

Would I had done ’t,

So the revenge alone pursued me. Polydor,

I love thee brotherly, but envy much

Thou hast robbed me of this deed. I would revenges

That possible strength might meet would seek us through

And put us to our answer.

Poor sick Fidele.

I’ll willingly to him. To gain his color

I’d let a parish of such Clotens blood,

And praise myself for charity.

The bird is dead

That we have made so much on. I had rather

Have skipped from sixteen years of age to sixty,

To have turned my leaping time into a crutch,

Than have seen this.

Stark, as you see;

Thus smiling, as some fly had tickled slumber,

Not as Death’s dart being laughed at; his right cheek

Reposing on a cushion.

O’ th’ floor,

His arms thus leagued. I thought he slept, and put

My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness

Answered my steps too loud.

With fairest flowers,

Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,

I’ll sweeten thy sad grave. Thou shalt not lack

The flower that’s like thy face, pale primrose; nor

The azured harebell, like thy veins; no, nor

The leaf of eglantine whom, not to slander,

Out-sweetened not thy breath. The ruddock would

With charitable bill—O bill, sore shaming

Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie

Without a monument—bring thee all this,

Yea, and furred moss besides, when flowers are none

To winter-ground thy corse.

Say, where shall ’s lay him?

Be ’t so.

And let us, Polydor, though now our voices

Have got the mannish crack, sing him to th’ ground

As once to our mother; use like note and words,

Save that “Euriphile” must be “Fidele.”

We’ll speak it then.

If you’ll go fetch him,

We’ll say our song the whilst.—Brother, begin.

’Tis true.

So, begin.

Fear no more the frown o’ th’ great;

Thou art past the tyrant’s stroke.

Care no more to clothe and eat;

To thee the reed is as the oak.

The scepter, learning, physic must

All follow this and come to dust.

Nor th’ all-dreaded thunderstone.

Thou hast finished joy and moan.

All lovers young, all lovers must

Consign to thee and come to dust.

Nor no witchcraft charm thee.

Nothing ill come near thee.

Quiet consummation have,

And renownèd be thy grave.

What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it

From action and adventure?

It is not likely

That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,

Behold their quartered fires, have both their eyes

And ears so cloyed importantly as now,

That they will waste their time upon our note,

To know from whence we are.

By this sun that shines,

I’ll thither. What thing is ’t that I never

Did see man die, scarce ever looked on blood

But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!

Never bestrid a horse save one that had

A rider like myself, who ne’er wore rowel

Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed

To look upon the holy sun, to have

The benefit of his blest beams, remaining

So long a poor unknown.

So say I. Amen.

One sand another

Not more resembles that sweet rosy lad

Who died, and was Fidele. What think you?

In that he spake too far.

Your danger’s ours.

Ay, my good lord.

You holp us, sir,

As you did mean indeed to be our brother.

Joyed are we that you are.

