


A goodly day not to keep house with such

Whose roof’s as low as ours! Stoop, boys. This gate

Instructs you how t’ adore the heavens and bows you

To a morning’s holy office. The gates of monarchs

Are arched so high that giants may jet through

And keep their impious turbans on, without

Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!

We house i’ th’ rock, yet use thee not so hardly

As prouder livers do.

Now for our mountain sport. Up to yond hill;

Your legs are young. I’ll tread these flats. Consider,

When you above perceive me like a crow,

That it is place which lessens and sets off,

And you may then revolve what tales I have told you

Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war.

This service is not service, so being done,

But being so allowed. To apprehend thus

Draws us a profit from all things we see,

And often, to our comfort, shall we find

The sharded beetle in a safer hold

Than is the full-winged eagle. O, this life

Is nobler than attending for a check,

Richer than doing nothing for a robe,

Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:

Such gain the cap of him that makes him fine

Yet keeps his book uncrossed. No life to ours.

How you speak!

Did you but know the city’s usuries

And felt them knowingly; the art o’ th’ court,

As hard to leave as keep, whose top to climb

Is certain falling, or so slipp’ry that

The fear’s as bad as falling; the toil o’ th’ war,

A pain that only seems to seek out danger

I’ th’ name of fame and honor, which dies i’ th’ search

And hath as oft a sland’rous epitaph

As record of fair act—nay, many times

Doth ill deserve by doing well; what’s worse,

Must curtsy at the censure. O boys, this story

The world may read in me. My body’s marked

With Roman swords, and my report was once

First with the best of note. Cymbeline loved me,

And when a soldier was the theme, my name

Was not far off. Then was I as a tree

Whose boughs did bend with fruit. But in one night

A storm or robbery, call it what you will,

Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,

And left me bare to weather.

My fault being nothing, as I have told you oft,

But that two villains, whose false oaths prevailed

Before my perfect honor, swore to Cymbeline

I was confederate with the Romans. So

Followed my banishment; and this twenty years

This rock and these demesnes have been my world,

Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid

More pious debts to heaven than in all

The fore-end of my time. But up to th’ mountains!

This is not hunters’ language. He that strikes

The venison first shall be the lord o’ th’ feast;

To him the other two shall minister,

And we will fear no poison, which attends

In place of greater state. I’ll meet you in the valleys.

How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!

These boys know little they are sons to th’ King,

Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.

They think they are mine, and, though trained up thus meanly,

I’ th’ cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit

The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them

In simple and low things to prince it much

Beyond the trick of others. This Polydor,

The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who

The King his father called Guiderius—Jove!

When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell

The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out

Into my story; say “Thus mine enemy fell,

And thus I set my foot on ’s neck,” even then

The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,

Strains his young nerves, and puts himself in posture

That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,

Once Arviragus, in as like a figure

Strikes life into my speech and shows much more

His own conceiving. Hark, the game is roused!

O Cymbeline, heaven and my conscience knows

Thou didst unjustly banish me; whereon,

At three and two years old I stole these babes,

Thinking to bar thee of succession as

Thou refts me of my lands. Euriphile,

Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their mother,

And every day do honor to her grave.

Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan called,

They take for natural father. The game is up!

You, Polydor, have proved best woodman and

Are master of the feast. Cadwal and I

Will play the cook and servant; ’tis our match.

The sweat of industry would dry and die

But for the end it works to. Come, our stomachs

Will make what’s homely savory. Weariness

Can snore upon the flint when resty sloth

Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here,

Poor house, that keep’st thyself.

 Stay, come not in!

But that it eats our victuals, I should think

Here were a fairy.

By Jupiter, an angel! Or, if not,

An earthly paragon. Behold divineness

No elder than a boy.

Whither bound?

What’s your name?

Prithee, fair youth,

Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds

By this rude place we live in. Well encountered!

’Tis almost night; you shall have better cheer

Ere you depart, and thanks to stay and eat it.—

Boys, bid him welcome.

He wrings at some distress.

Hark, boys.

It shall be so.

Boys, we’ll go dress our hunt.—Fair youth, come in.

Discourse is heavy, fasting. When we have supped,

We’ll mannerly demand thee of thy story

So far as thou wilt speak it.

You are not well. Remain here in the cave.

We’ll come to you after hunting.

What? How, how?

O, noble strain!

O, worthiness of nature, breed of greatness!

Cowards father cowards and base things sire base;

Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.

I’m not their father, yet who this should be

Doth miracle itself, loved before me.—

’Tis the ninth hour o’ th’ morn.

To th’ field, to th’ field!

We’ll leave you for this time. Go in and rest.

Pray, be not sick,

For you must be our huswife.

And shalt be ever.

This youth, howe’er distressed, appears he hath had

Good ancestors.

It is great morning. Come, away. Who’s there?

 “Those runagates”?

Means he not us? I partly know him. ’Tis

Cloten, the son o’ th’ Queen. I fear some ambush.

I saw him not these many years, and yet

I know ’tis he. We are held as outlaws. Hence.

No company’s abroad?

I cannot tell. Long is it since I saw him,

But time hath nothing blurred those lines of favor

Which then he wore. The snatches in his voice

And burst of speaking were as his. I am absolute

’Twas very Cloten.

Being scarce made up,

I mean to man, he had not apprehension

Of roaring terrors; for defect of judgment

Is oft the cause of fear.    But see, thy brother.

What hast thou done?

We are all undone.

No single soul

Can we set eye on, but in all safe reason

He must have some attendants. Though his humor

Was nothing but mutation—ay, and that

From one bad thing to worse—not frenzy,

Not absolute madness could so far have raved

To bring him here alone. Although perhaps

It may be heard at court that such as we

Cave here, hunt here, are outlaws, and in time

May make some stronger head, the which he hearing—

As it is like him—might break out and swear

He’d fetch us in, yet is ’t not probable

To come alone, either he so undertaking

Or they so suffering. Then on good ground we fear,

If we do fear this body hath a tail

More perilous than the head.

I had no mind

To hunt this day. The boy Fidele’s sickness

Did make my way long forth.

I fear ’twill be revenged.

Would, Polydor, thou hadst not done ’t, though valor

Becomes thee well enough.

Well, ’tis done.

We’ll hunt no more today, nor seek for danger

Where there’s no profit. I prithee, to our rock.

You and Fidele play the cooks. I’ll stay

Till hasty Polydor return, and bring him

To dinner presently.

O thou goddess,

Thou divine Nature, thou thyself thou blazon’st

In these two princely boys! They are as gentle

As zephyrs blowing below the violet,

Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough,

Their royal blood enchafed, as the rud’st wind

That by the top doth take the mountain pine

And make him stoop to th’ vale. ’Tis wonder

That an invisible instinct should frame them

To royalty unlearned, honor untaught,

Civility not seen from other, valor

That wildly grows in them but yields a crop

As if it had been sowed. Yet still it’s strange

What Cloten’s being here to us portends,

Or what his death will bring us.

My ingenious instrument!

Hark, Polydor, it sounds! But what occasion

Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark.

He went hence even now.

Look, here he comes,

And brings the dire occasion in his arms

Of what we blame him for.

O melancholy,

Whoever yet could sound thy bottom, find

The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare

Might eas’liest harbor in?—Thou blessèd thing,

Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I,

Thou died’st, a most rare boy, of melancholy.—

How found you him?

Great griefs, I see, med’cine the less, for Cloten

Is quite forgot. He was a queen’s son, boys,

And though he came our enemy, remember

He was paid for that. Though mean and mighty,

Rotting together, have one dust, yet reverence,

That angel of the world, doth make distinction

Of place ’tween high and low. Our foe was princely,

And though you took his life as being our foe,

Yet bury him as a prince.

Here’s a few flowers, but ’bout midnight more.

The herbs that have on them cold dew o’ th’ night

Are strewings fitt’st for graves. Upon their faces.—

You were as flowers, now withered. Even so

These herblets shall, which we upon you strew.—

Come on, away; apart upon our knees.

The ground that gave them first has them again.

Their pleasures here are past; so is their pain.

Let us from it.

Sons,

We’ll higher to the mountains, there secure us.

To the King’s party there’s no going. Newness

Of Cloten’s death—we being not known, not mustered

Among the bands—may drive us to a render

Where we have lived, and so extort from ’s that

Which we have done, whose answer would be death

Drawn on with torture.

O, I am known

Of many in the army. Many years,

Though Cloten then but young, you see not wore him

From my remembrance. And besides, the King

Hath not deserved my service nor your loves,

Who find in my exile the want of breeding,

The certainty of this hard life, aye hopeless

To have the courtesy your cradle promised,

But to be still hot summer’s tanlings and

The shrinking slaves of winter.

No reason I—since of your lives you set

So slight a valuation—should reserve

My cracked one to more care. Have with you, boys!

If in your country wars you chance to die,

That is my bed, too, lads, and there I’ll lie.

Lead, lead. The time seems long; their blood thinks scorn

Till it fly out and show them princes born.

Stand, stand! We have th’ advantage of the ground.

The lane is guarded. Nothing routs us but

The villainy of our fears.

I never saw

Such noble fury in so poor a thing,

Such precious deeds in one that promised naught

But beggary and poor looks.

Sir,

In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen.

Further to boast were neither true nor modest,

Unless I add we are honest.

Is not this boy revived from death?

Peace, peace. See further. He eyes us not. Forbear.

Creatures may be alike. Were ’t he, I am sure

He would have spoke to us.

Be silent. Let’s see further.

My boys,

There was our error.

Though you did love this youth, I blame you not.

You had a motive for ’t.

Stay, sir king.

This man is better than the man he slew,

As well descended as thyself, and hath

More of thee merited than a band of Clotens

Had ever scar for.—Let his arms alone.

They were not born for bondage.

We will die all three

But I will prove that two on ’s are as good

As I have given out him.—My sons, I must

For mine own part unfold a dangerous speech,

Though haply well for you.

Have at it, then.—By leave,

Thou hadst, great king, a subject who

Was called Belarius.

He it is that hath

Assumed this age; indeed a banished man,

I know not how a traitor.

Not too hot.

First pay me for the nursing of thy sons

And let it be confiscate all, so soon

As I have received it.

I am too blunt and saucy. Here’s my knee.

Ere I arise I will prefer my sons,

Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir,

These two young gentlemen that call me father

And think they are my sons are none of mine.

They are the issue of your loins, my liege,

And blood of your begetting.

So sure as you your father’s. I, old Morgan,

Am that Belarius whom you sometime banished.

Your pleasure was my mere offense, my punishment

Itself, and all my treason. That I suffered

Was all the harm I did. These gentle princes—

For such and so they are—these twenty years

Have I trained up; those arts they have as I

Could put into them. My breeding was, sir, as

Your Highness knows. Their nurse Euriphile,

Whom for the theft I wedded, stole these children

Upon my banishment. I moved her to ’t,

Having received the punishment before

For that which I did then. Beaten for loyalty

Excited me to treason. Their dear loss,

The more of you ’twas felt, the more it shaped

Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir,

Here are your sons again, and I must lose

Two of the sweet’st companions in the world.

The benediction of these covering heavens

Fall on their heads like dew, for they are worthy

To inlay heaven with stars.

Be pleased awhile.

This gentleman whom I call Polydor,

Most worthy prince, as yours is true Guiderius;

This gentleman, my Cadwal, Arviragus,

Your younger princely son. He, sir, was lapped

In a most curious mantle, wrought by th’ hand

Of his queen mother, which for more probation

I can with ease produce.

This is he,

Who hath upon him still that natural stamp.

It was wise Nature’s end in the donation

To be his evidence now.

