


Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?

How long hath this possession held the man?

Hath he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea?

Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye

Strayed his affection in unlawful love,

A sin prevailing much in youthful men

Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing?

Which of these sorrows is he subject to?

You should for that have reprehended him.

Ay, but not rough enough.

Haply in private.

Ay, but not enough.

And thereof came it that the man was mad.

The venom clamors of a jealous woman

Poisons more deadly than a mad dog’s tooth.

It seems his sleeps were hindered by thy railing,

And thereof comes it that his head is light.

Thou sayst his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings.

Unquiet meals make ill digestions.

Thereof the raging fire of fever bred,

And what’s a fever but a fit of madness?

Thou sayest his sports were hindered by thy brawls.

Sweet recreation barred, what doth ensue

But moody and dull melancholy,

Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,

And at her heels a huge infectious troop

Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?

In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest

To be disturbed would mad or man or beast.

The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits

Hath scared thy husband from the use of wits.

No, not a creature enters in my house.

Neither. He took this place for sanctuary,

And it shall privilege him from your hands

Till I have brought him to his wits again

Or lose my labor in assaying it.

Be patient, for I will not let him stir

Till I have used the approvèd means I have,

With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers,

To make of him a formal man again.

It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,

A charitable duty of my order.

Therefore depart and leave him here with me.

Be quiet and depart. Thou shalt not have him.

Most mighty duke, behold a man much wronged.

Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds

And gain a husband by his liberty.—

Speak, old Egeon, if thou be’st the man

That hadst a wife once called Emilia,

That bore thee at a burden two fair sons.

O, if thou be’st the same Egeon, speak,

And speak unto the same Emilia.

By men of Epidamium he and I

And the twin Dromio all were taken up;

But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth

By force took Dromio and my son from them,

And me they left with those of Epidamium.

What then became of them I cannot tell;

I to this fortune that you see me in.

Renownèd duke, vouchsafe to take the pains

To go with us into the abbey here

And hear at large discoursèd all our fortunes,

And all that are assembled in this place

That by this sympathizèd one day’s error

Have suffered wrong. Go, keep us company,

And we shall make full satisfaction.—

Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail

Of you, my sons, and till this present hour

My heavy burden ne’er deliverèd.—

The Duke, my husband, and my children both,

And you, the calendars of their nativity,

Go to a gossips’ feast, and go with me.

After so long grief, such nativity!

