


Many a man would take you at your word

And go indeed, having so good a mean.

What answer, sir? When spake I such a word?

I did not see you since you sent me hence,

Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.

I am glad to see you in this merry vein.

What means this jest, I pray you, master, tell me?

Hold, sir, for God’s sake! Now your jest is earnest.

Upon what bargain do you give it me?

“Sconce” call you it? So you

would leave battering, I had rather have it a

“head.” An you use these blows long, I must get a

sconce for my head and ensconce it too, or else I

shall seek my wit in my shoulders. But I pray, sir,

why am I beaten?

Nothing, sir, but that I am

beaten.

Ay, sir, and wherefore, for they

say every why hath a wherefore.

Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,

When in the “why” and the “wherefore” is neither rhyme nor reason?

Well, sir, I thank you.

Marry, sir, for this something

that you gave me for nothing.

No, sir, I think the meat wants

that I have.

Basting.

If it be, sir, I pray you eat none of

it.

Lest it make you choleric and

purchase me another dry basting.

I durst have denied that before

you were so choleric.

Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as

the plain bald pate of Father Time himself.

There’s no time for a man to

recover his hair that grows bald by nature.

Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig,

and recover the lost hair of another man.

Because it is a blessing that he

bestows on beasts, and what he hath scanted men

in hair, he hath given them in wit.

Not a man of those but he hath

the wit to lose his hair.

The plainer dealer, the sooner

lost. Yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.

For two, and sound ones too.

Sure ones, then.

Certain ones, then.

The one, to save the money that

he spends in tiring; the other, that at dinner they

should not drop in his porridge.

Marry, and did, sir: namely, e’en

no time to recover hair lost by nature.

Thus I mend it: Time himself is

bald and therefore, to the world’s end, will have

bald followers.

By me?

I, sir? I never saw her till this time.

I never spake with her in all my life.

O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.

This is the fairy land. O spite of spites!

We talk with goblins, owls, and sprites.

If we obey them not, this will ensue:

They’ll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.

I am transformèd, master, am I not?

Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.

No, I am an ape.

’Tis true. She rides me, and I long for grass.

’Tis so. I am an ass; else it could never be

But I should know her as well as she knows me.

Master, shall I be porter at the gate?

Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch!

Either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch.

Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call’st for such store

When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.

Let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch cold on ’s feet.

Right, sir, I’ll tell you when an you’ll tell me wherefore.

Nor today here you must not. Come again when you may.

The porter for this time, sir, and my name is Dromio.

If thy name be called “Luce,” Luce, thou hast answered him well.

And you said no.

By my troth, your town is troubled with unruly boys.

Break any breaking here, and I’ll break your knave’s pate.

It seems thou want’st breaking. Out upon thee, hind!

Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.

Do you know me, sir? Am I

Dromio? Am I your man? Am I myself?

I am an ass, I am a woman’s

man, and besides myself.

Marry, sir, besides myself I am

due to a woman, one that claims me, one that

haunts me, one that will have me.

Marry, sir, such claim as you

would lay to your horse, and she would have me as

a beast; not that I being a beast she would have me,

but that she, being a very beastly creature, lays

claim to me.

A very reverend body, ay, such a

one as a man may not speak of without he say

“sir-reverence.” I have but lean luck in the match,

and yet is she a wondrous fat marriage.

Marry, sir, she’s the kitchen

wench, and all grease, and I know not what use to

put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from

her by her own light. I warrant her rags and the

tallow in them will burn a Poland winter. If she lives

till doomsday, she’ll burn a week longer than the

whole world.

Swart like my shoe, but her face

nothing like so clean kept. For why? She sweats. A

man may go overshoes in the grime of it.

No, sir, ’tis in grain; Noah’s flood

could not do it.

Nell, sir, but her name and

three quarters—that’s an ell and three quarters—

will not measure her from hip to hip.

No longer from head to foot than

from hip to hip. She is spherical, like a globe. I

could find out countries in her.

Marry, sir, in her buttocks. I

found it out by the bogs.

I found it by the barrenness,

hard in the palm of the hand.

In her forehead, armed and

reverted, making war against her heir.

I looked for the chalky cliffs, but

I could find no whiteness in them. But I guess it

stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran

between France and it.

Faith, I saw it not, but I felt it hot

in her breath.

O, sir, upon her nose, all o’erembellished

with rubies, carbuncles, sapphires,

declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of

Spain, who sent whole armadas of carracks to be

ballast at her nose.

O, sir, I did not look so low. To

conclude: this drudge or diviner laid claim to me,

called me Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told

me what privy marks I had about me, as the mark

of my shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart

on my left arm, that I, amazed, ran from her as a

witch.

And, I think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my heart of steel,

She had transformed me to a curtal dog and made me turn i’ th’ wheel.

As from a bear a man would run for life,

So fly I from her that would be my wife.

Master, there’s a bark of Epidamium

That stays but till her owner comes aboard,

And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,

I have conveyed aboard, and I have bought

The oil, the balsamum, and aqua vitae.

The ship is in her trim; the merry wind

Blows fair from land. They stay for naught at all

But for their owner, master, and yourself.

A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.

You sent me for a rope’s end as soon.

You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.

To Adriana. That is where we dined,

Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband.

She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.

Thither I must, although against my will,

For servants must their masters’ minds fulfill.

Here, go—the desk, the purse! Sweet, now make haste.

By running fast.

No, he’s in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.

A devil in an everlasting garment hath him,

One whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel;

A fiend, a fairy, pitiless and rough;

A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff;

A backfriend, a shoulder clapper, one that countermands

The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands;

A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well,

One that before the judgment carries poor souls to hell.

I do not know the matter. He is ’rested on the case.

I know not at whose suit he is arrested well,

But is in a suit of buff which ’rested him; that can I tell.

Will you send him, mistress, redemption—the money in his desk?

Not on a band, but on a stronger thing:

A chain, a chain. Do you not hear it ring?

No, no, the bell. ’Tis time that I were gone.

It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.

O yes, if any hour meet a sergeant, he turns back for very fear.

Time is a very bankrout and owes more than he’s worth to season.

Nay, he’s a thief too. Have you not heard men say

That time comes stealing on by night and day?

If he be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,

Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?

Master, here’s the gold you sent

me for. What, have you got the picture of old Adam

new-appareled?

Not that Adam that kept the

Paradise, but that Adam that keeps the prison; he

that goes in the calf’s skin that was killed for the

Prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil

angel, and bid you forsake your liberty.

No? Why, ’tis a plain case: he

that went like a bass viol in a case of leather; the

man, sir, that, when gentlemen are tired, gives

them a sob and ’rests them; he, sir, that takes pity

on decayed men and gives them suits of durance; he

that sets up his rest to do more exploits with his

mace than a morris-pike.

Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band;

he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his

band; one that thinks a man always going to bed

and says “God give you good rest.”

Why, sir, I brought you word an

hour since that the bark Expedition put forth tonight,

and then were you hindered by the sergeant

to tarry for the hoy Delay. Here are the angels that

you sent for to deliver you.

Master, is this Mistress Satan?

Nay, she is worse; she is the

devil’s dam, and here she comes in the habit of a

light wench. And thereof comes that the wenches

say “God damn me”; that’s as much to say “God

make me a light wench.” It is written they appear

to men like angels of light. Light is an effect of fire,

and fire will burn: ergo, light wenches will burn.

Come not near her.

Master, if you do, expect spoon

meat, or bespeak a long spoon.

Marry, he must have a long

spoon that must eat with the devil.

Some devils ask but the parings

of one’s nail, a rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a

nut, a cherrystone; but she, more covetous, would

have a chain. Master, be wise. An if you give it her,

the devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.

“Fly pride,” says the peacock.

Mistress, that you know.

She that would be your wife now ran from you.

Faith, stay here this night. They

will surely do us no harm. You saw they speak us

fair, give us gold. Methinks they are such a gentle

nation that, but for the mountain of mad flesh that

claims marriage of me, I could find in my heart to

stay here still, and turn witch.

Run, master, run. For God’s sake, take a house.

This is some priory. In, or we are spoiled.

I, sir, am Dromio. Command him away.

O, my old master.—Who hath bound him here?

Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?

Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.

There is a fat friend at your master’s house

That kitchened me for you today at dinner.

She now shall be my sister, not my wife.

Not I, sir. You are my elder.

We’ll draw cuts for the signior.

Till then, lead thou first.

