


My lord, I’ll tell you that self bill is urged

Which in th’ eleventh year of the last king’s reign

Was like, and had indeed against us passed

But that the scambling and unquiet time

Did push it out of farther question.

It must be thought on. If it pass against us,

We lose the better half of our possession,

For all the temporal lands which men devout

By testament have given to the Church

Would they strip from us, being valued thus:

“As much as would maintain, to the King’s honor,

Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,

Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;

And, to relief of lazars and weak age

Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,

A hundred almshouses right well supplied;

And to the coffers of the King besides,

A thousand pounds by th’ year.” Thus runs the bill.

’Twould drink the cup and all.

The King is full of grace and fair regard.

The courses of his youth promised it not.

The breath no sooner left his father’s body

But that his wildness, mortified in him,

Seemed to die too. Yea, at that very moment

Consideration like an angel came

And whipped th’ offending Adam out of him,

Leaving his body as a paradise

T’ envelop and contain celestial spirits.

Never was such a sudden scholar made,

Never came reformation in a flood

With such a heady currance scouring faults,

Nor never Hydra-headed willfulness

So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,

As in this king.

Hear him but reason in divinity

And, all-admiring, with an inward wish

You would desire the King were made a prelate;

Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,

You would say it hath been all in all his study;

List his discourse of war, and you shall hear

A fearful battle rendered you in music;

Turn him to any cause of policy,

The Gordian knot of it he will unloose

Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,

The air, a chartered libertine, is still,

And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears

To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;

So that the art and practic part of life

Must be the mistress to this theoric;

Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,

Since his addiction was to courses vain,

His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,

His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports,

And never noted in him any study,

Any retirement, any sequestration

From open haunts and popularity.

It must be so, for miracles are ceased,

And therefore we must needs admit the means

How things are perfected.

He seems indifferent,

Or rather swaying more upon our part

Than cherishing th’ exhibitors against us;

For I have made an offer to his Majesty—

Upon our spiritual convocation

And in regard of causes now in hand,

Which I have opened to his Grace at large,

As touching France—to give a greater sum

Than ever at one time the clergy yet

Did to his predecessors part withal.

With good acceptance of his Majesty—

Save that there was not time enough to hear,

As I perceived his Grace would fain have done,

The severals and unhidden passages

Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms,

And generally to the crown and seat of France,

Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.

The French ambassador upon that instant

Craved audience. And the hour, I think, is come

To give him hearing. Is it four o’clock?

Then go we in to know his embassy,

Which I could with a ready guess declare

Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.

God and his angels guard your sacred throne

And make you long become it.

Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers

That owe yourselves, your lives, and services

To this imperial throne. There is no bar

To make against your Highness’ claim to France

But this, which they produce from Pharamond:

“In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant”

(No woman shall succeed in Salic land),

Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze

To be the realm of France, and Pharamond

The founder of this law and female bar.

Yet their own authors faithfully affirm

That the land Salic is in Germany,

Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe,

Where Charles the Great, having subdued the Saxons,

There left behind and settled certain French,

Who, holding in disdain the German women

For some dishonest manners of their life,

Established then this law: to wit, no female

Should be inheritrix in Salic land,

Which “Salic,” as I said, ’twixt Elbe and Sala

Is at this day in Germany called Meissen.

Then doth it well appear the Salic law

Was not devisèd for the realm of France,

Nor did the French possess the Salic land

Until four hundred one and twenty years

After defunction of King Pharamond,

Idly supposed the founder of this law,

Who died within the year of our redemption

Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great

Subdued the Saxons and did seat the French

Beyond the river Sala in the year

Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,

King Pepin, which deposèd Childeric,

Did, as heir general, being descended

Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,

Make claim and title to the crown of France.

Hugh Capet also, who usurped the crown

Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male

Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,

To find his title with some shows of truth,

Though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught,

Conveyed himself as th’ heir to th’ Lady Lingare,

Daughter to Charlemagne, who was the son

To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son

Of Charles the Great. Also King Lewis the Tenth,

Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,

Could not keep quiet in his conscience,

Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied

That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,

Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,

Daughter to Charles the foresaid Duke of Lorraine:

By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great

Was reunited to the crown of France.

So that, as clear as is the summer’s sun,

King Pepin’s title and Hugh Capet’s claim,

King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear

To hold in right and title of the female.

So do the kings of France unto this day,

Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law

To bar your Highness claiming from the female,

And rather choose to hide them in a net

Than amply to imbar their crooked titles

Usurped from you and your progenitors.

The sin upon my head, dread sovereign,

For in the Book of Numbers is it writ:

“When the man dies, let the inheritance

Descend unto the daughter.” Gracious lord,

Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag,

Look back into your mighty ancestors.

Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire’s tomb,

From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit

And your great-uncle’s, Edward the Black Prince,

Who on the French ground played a tragedy,

Making defeat on the full power of France

Whiles his most mighty father on a hill

Stood smiling to behold his lion’s whelp

Forage in blood of French nobility.

O noble English, that could entertain

With half their forces the full pride of France

And let another half stand laughing by,

All out of work and cold for action!

O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,

With blood and sword and fire to win your right,

In aid whereof we of the spiritualty

Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum

As never did the clergy at one time

Bring in to any of your ancestors.

They of those marches, gracious sovereign,

Shall be a wall sufficient to defend

Our inland from the pilfering borderers.

She hath been then more feared than harmed, my liege,

For hear her but exampled by herself:

When all her chivalry hath been in France

And she a mourning widow of her nobles,

She hath herself not only well defended

But taken and impounded as a stray

The King of Scots, whom she did send to France

To fill King Edward’s fame with prisoner kings

And make her chronicle as rich with praise

As is the ooze and bottom of the sea

With sunken wrack and sumless treasuries.

Therefore doth heaven divide

The state of man in divers functions,

Setting endeavor in continual motion,

To which is fixèd as an aim or butt

Obedience; for so work the honeybees,

Creatures that by a rule in nature teach

The act of order to a peopled kingdom.

They have a king and officers of sorts,

Where some like magistrates correct at home,

Others like merchants venture trade abroad,

Others like soldiers armèd in their stings

Make boot upon the summer’s velvet buds,

Which pillage they with merry march bring home

To the tent royal of their emperor,

Who, busied in his majesty, surveys

The singing masons building roofs of gold,

The civil citizens kneading up the honey,

The poor mechanic porters crowding in

Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate,

The sad-eyed justice with his surly hum

Delivering o’er to executors pale

The lazy yawning drone. I this infer:

That many things, having full reference

To one consent, may work contrariously,

As many arrows loosèd several ways

Come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town,

As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea,

As many lines close in the dial’s center,

So may a thousand actions, once afoot,

End in one purpose and be all well borne

Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege!

Divide your happy England into four,

Whereof take you one quarter into France,

And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.

If we, with thrice such powers left at home,

Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,

Let us be worried, and our nation lose

The name of hardiness and policy.

