


Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master,

and your hostess. He is very sick and would to

bed.—Good Bardolph, put thy face between his

sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. Faith,

he’s very ill.

Yes, that he did, and said they were devils

incarnate.

He said once, the devil would have him about

women.

Do you not remember he saw a flea stick upon

Bardolph’s nose, and he said it was a black soul

burning in hell?

And that’s but unwholesome food, they say.

Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would

give all my fame for a pot of ale, and safety.

As duly,

But not as truly,

As bird doth sing on bough.

As young as I am, I have observed these three

swashers. I am boy to them all three, but all they

three, though they would serve me, could not be

man to me. For indeed three such antics do not

amount to a man: for Bardolph, he is white-livered

and red-faced, by the means whereof he faces it out

but fights not; for Pistol, he hath a killing tongue

and a quiet sword, by the means whereof he breaks

words and keeps whole weapons; for Nym, he hath

heard that men of few words are the best men, and

therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest he should

be thought a coward, but his few bad words are

matched with as few good deeds, for he never broke

any man’s head but his own, and that was against a

post when he was drunk. They will steal anything

and call it purchase. Bardolph stole a lute case, bore

it twelve leagues, and sold it for three halfpence.

Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in filching,

and in Calais they stole a fire shovel. I knew by that

piece of service the men would carry coals. They

would have me as familiar with men’s pockets as

their gloves or their handkerchers, which makes

much against my manhood, if I should take from

another’s pocket to put into mine, for it is plain

pocketing up of wrongs. I must leave them and seek

some better service. Their villainy goes against my

weak stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.

Écoutez. Comment êtes-vous appelé?

He says his name is Master Fer.

I do not know the French for “fer,” and “ferret,”

and “firk.”

Il me commande à vous dire que vous faites vous

prêt, car ce soldat ici est disposé tout à cette heure de

couper votre gorge.

He prays you to save his life. He is a gentleman of a

good house, and for his ransom he will give you two

hundred crowns.

Encore qu’il est contre son jurement de pardonner

aucun prisonnier; néanmoins, pour les écus que vous

lui avez promis, il est content à vous donner la liberté,

le franchisement.

He gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks,

and he esteems himself happy that he hath fall’n

into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most

brave, valorous, and thrice-worthy seigneur of

England.

Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.

I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty

a heart. But the saying is true: “The empty vessel

makes the greatest sound.” Bardolph and Nym had

ten times more valor than this roaring devil i’ th’ old

play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden

dagger, and they are both hanged, and so would

this be if he durst steal anything adventurously. I

must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our

camp. The French might have a good prey of us if he

knew of it, for there is none to guard it but boys.

