
My most redoubted father,

It is most meet we arm us ’gainst the foe,

For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,

Though war nor no known quarrel were in question

But that defenses, musters, preparations

Should be maintained, assembled, and collected

As were a war in expectation.

Therefore I say ’tis meet we all go forth

To view the sick and feeble parts of France.

And let us do it with no show of fear,

No, with no more than if we heard that England

Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance.

For, my good liege, she is so idly kinged,

Her scepter so fantastically borne

By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,

That fear attends her not.

Well, ’tis not so, my Lord High Constable.

But though we think it so, it is no matter.

In cases of defense, ’tis best to weigh

The enemy more mighty than he seems.

So the proportions of defense are filled,

Which of a weak and niggardly projection

Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting

A little cloth.

Turn head and stop pursuit, for coward dogs

Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten

Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,

Take up the English short, and let them know

Of what a monarchy you are the head.

Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin

As self-neglecting.

For the Dauphin,

I stand here for him. What to him from England?

Say, if my father render fair return,

It is against my will, for I desire

Nothing but odds with England. To that end,

As matching to his youth and vanity,

I did present him with the Paris balls.

Ô Dieu vivant, shall a few sprays of us,

The emptying of our fathers’ luxury,

Our scions, put in wild and savage stock,

Spurt up so suddenly into the clouds

And overlook their grafters?

By faith and honor,

Our madams mock at us and plainly say

Our mettle is bred out, and they will give

Their bodies to the lust of English youth

To new-store France with bastard warriors.

Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.

My Lord of Orléans and my Lord High Constable,

you talk of horse and armor?

What a long night is this! I will not change

my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns.

Çà, ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his

entrails were hairs, le cheval volant, the Pegasus, qui

a les narines de feu. When I bestride him, I soar; I

am a hawk; he trots the air. The earth sings when he

touches it. The basest horn of his hoof is more

musical than the pipe of Hermes.

And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for

Perseus. He is pure air and fire, and the dull

elements of earth and water never appear in him,

but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts

him. He is indeed a horse, and all other jades you

may call beasts.

It is the prince of palfreys; his neigh is like

the bidding of a monarch, and his countenance

enforces homage.

Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from

the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb,

vary deserved praise on my palfrey. It is a theme as

fluent as the sea. Turn the sands into eloquent

tongues, and my horse is argument for them all. ’Tis

a subject for a sovereign to reason on, and for a

sovereign’s sovereign to ride on, and for the world,

familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their

particular functions and wonder at him. I once writ

a sonnet in his praise and began thus: “Wonder of

nature—”

Then did they imitate that which I composed

to my courser, for my horse is my mistress.

Me well—which is the prescript praise and

perfection of a good and particular mistress.

So perhaps did yours.

O, then belike she was old and gentle, and

you rode like a kern of Ireland, your French hose

off, and in your strait strossers.

Be warned by me, then: they that ride so, and

ride not warily, fall into foul bogs. I had rather have

my horse to my mistress.

I tell thee, constable, my mistress wears his

own hair.

“Le chien est retourné à son propre vomissement,

et la truie lavée au bourbier.” Thou mak’st use

of anything.

Some of them will fall tomorrow, I hope.

That may be, for you bear a many superfluously,

and ’twere more honor some were away.

Would I were able to load him with his

desert! Will it never be day? I will trot tomorrow a

mile, and my way shall be paved with English faces.

’Tis midnight. I’ll go arm myself.

Montez à cheval! My horse, varlet! Lackey! Ha!

Via les eaux et terre.

Cieux, cousin Orléans.

Now, my Lord Constable?

Mount them, and make incision in their hides,

That their hot blood may spin in English eyes

And dout them with superfluous courage. Ha!

Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits,

And give their fasting horses provender,

And after fight with them?

Mort de ma vie, all is confounded, all!

Reproach and everlasting shame

Sits mocking in our plumes. Ô méchante Fortune!

Do not run away.

O perdurable shame! Let’s stab ourselves.

Be these the wretches that we played at dice for?

