


Thus comes the English with full power upon us,

And more than carefully it us concerns

To answer royally in our defenses.

Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Brittany,

Of Brabant and of Orléans, shall make forth,

And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,

To line and new-repair our towns of war

With men of courage and with means defendant.

For England his approaches makes as fierce

As waters to the sucking of a gulf.

It fits us then to be as provident

As fear may teach us out of late examples

Left by the fatal and neglected English

Upon our fields.

Think we King Harry strong,

And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.

The kindred of him hath been fleshed upon us,

And he is bred out of that bloody strain

That haunted us in our familiar paths.

Witness our too-much-memorable shame

When Cressy battle fatally was struck

And all our princes captived by the hand

Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales,

Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing

Up in the air, crowned with the golden sun,

Saw his heroical seed and smiled to see him

Mangle the work of nature and deface

The patterns that by God and by French fathers

Had twenty years been made. This is a stem

Of that victorious stock, and let us fear

The native mightiness and fate of him.

We’ll give them present audience. Go, and bring them.

You see this chase is hotly followed, friends.

From our brother of England?

Or else what follows?

For us, we will consider of this further.

Tomorrow shall you bear our full intent

Back to our brother of England.

Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.

You shall be soon dispatched with fair conditions.

A night is but small breath and little pause

To answer matters of this consequence.

’Tis certain he hath passed the river Somme.

Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence.

Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.

Up, princes, and, with spirit of honor edged

More sharper than your swords, hie to the field:

Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;

You Dukes of Orléans, Bourbon, and of Berri,

Alençon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy;

Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,

Beaumont, Grandpré, Roussi, and Faulconbridge,

Foix, Lestrale, Bouciquault, and Charolois;

High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights,

For your great seats now quit you of great shames.

Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land

With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur.

Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow

Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat

The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon.

Go down upon him—you have power enough—

And in a captive chariot into Rouen

Bring him our prisoner.

Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy,

And let him say to England that we send

To know what willing ransom he will give.—

Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.

Be patient, for you shall remain with us.—

Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all,

And quickly bring us word of England’s fall.

Right joyous are we to behold your face,

Most worthy brother England. Fairly met.—

So are you, princes English, every one.

I have but with a cursitory eye

O’erglanced the articles. Pleaseth your Grace

To appoint some of your council presently

To sit with us once more with better heed

To resurvey them, we will suddenly

Pass our accept and peremptory answer.

Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively,

the cities turned into a maid, for they are all

girdled with maiden walls that war hath never

entered.

So please you.

We have consented to all terms of reason.

Nor this I have not, brother, so denied

But your request shall make me let it pass.

Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up

Issue to me, that the contending kingdoms

Of France and England, whose very shores look pale

With envy of each other’s happiness,

May cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction

Plant neighborhood and Christian-like accord

In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance

His bleeding sword ’twixt England and fair France.

Amen.

