


Is ’t possible the spells of France should juggle

Men into such strange mysteries?

As far as I see, all the good our English

Have got by the late voyage is but merely

A fit or two o’ th’ face; but they are shrewd ones,

For when they hold ’em, you would swear directly

Their very noses had been counselors

To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.

Death! My lord,

Their clothes are after such a pagan cut to ’t,

That, sure, they’ve worn out Christendom.   How now?

What news, Sir Thomas Lovell?

What is ’t for?

I’m glad ’tis there; now I would pray our monsieurs

To think an English courtier may be wise

And never see the Louvre.

What a loss our ladies

Will have of these trim vanities!

Well said, Lord Sands.

Your colt’s tooth is not cast yet?

Sir Thomas,

Whither were you a-going?

O, ’tis true.

This night he makes a supper, and a great one,

To many lords and ladies. There will be

The beauty of this kingdom, I’ll assure you.

No doubt he’s noble;

He had a black mouth that said other of him.

True, they are so,

But few now give so great ones. My barge stays.

Your Lordship shall along.—Come, good Sir Thomas,

We shall be late else, which I would not be,

For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guilford

This night to be comptrollers.

You are young, Sir Harry Guilford.

Sweet ladies, will it please you sit?—Sir Harry,

Place you that side; I’ll take the charge of this.

His Grace is ent’ring. Nay, you must not freeze;

Two women placed together makes cold weather.

My Lord Sands, you are one will keep ’em waking.

Pray sit between these ladies.

Well said, my lord.

So, now you’re fairly seated, gentlemen,

The penance lies on you if these fair ladies

Pass away frowning.

Look out there, some of you.

How now, what is ’t?

Because they speak no English, thus they prayed

To tell your Grace: that, having heard by fame

Of this so noble and so fair assembly

This night to meet here, they could do no less,

Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,

But leave their flocks and, under your fair conduct,

Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat

An hour of revels with ’em.

Your Grace?

I will, my lord.

Such a one they all confess

There is indeed, which they would have your Grace

Find out, and he will take it.

An ’t please your Grace, Sir Thomas Bullen’s daughter,

The Viscount Rochford, one of her Highness’ women.

My lord, the horses your Lordship sent

for, with all the care I had I saw well chosen, ridden,

and furnished. They were young and handsome and

of the best breed in the north. When they were ready

to set out for London, a man of my Lord Cardinal’s,

by commission and main power, took ’em from me

with this reason: his master would be served before

a subject, if not before the King, which stopped our

mouths, sir.

I fear he will indeed; well, let him have them.

He will have all, I think.

Good day to both your Graces.

I left him private,

Full of sad thoughts and troubles.

It seems the marriage with his brother’s wife

Has crept too near his conscience.

Heaven keep me from such counsel! ’Tis most true:

These news are everywhere, every tongue speaks ’em,

And every true heart weeps for ’t. All that dare

Look into these affairs see this main end,

The French king’s sister. Heaven will one day open

The King’s eyes, that so long have slept upon

This bold bad man.

Excuse me;

The King has sent me otherwhere. Besides,

You’ll find a most unfit time to disturb him.

Health to your Lordships.

Good morrow, ladies. What were ’t worth to know

The secret of your conference?

It was a gentle business, and becoming

The action of good women. There is hope

All will be well.

You bear a gentle mind, and heav’nly blessings

Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady,

Perceive I speak sincerely, and high note’s

Ta’en of your many virtues, the King’s Majesty

Commends his good opinion of you to you, and

Does purpose honor to you no less flowing

Than Marchioness of Pembroke, to which title

A thousand pound a year annual support

Out of his grace he adds.

Lady,

I shall not fail t’ approve the fair conceit

The King hath of you. I have perused her well.

Beauty and honor in her are so mingled

That they have caught the King. And who knows yet

But from this lady may proceed a gem

To lighten all this isle?—I’ll to the King

And say I spoke with you.

My lords, you speak your pleasures;

What he deserves of you and me I know;

What we can do to him—though now the time

Gives way to us—I much fear. If you cannot

Bar his access to th’ King, never attempt

Anything on him, for he hath a witchcraft

Over the King in ’s tongue.

The King in this perceives him how he coasts

And hedges his own way. But in this point

All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic

After his patient’s death: the King already

Hath married the fair lady.

Now God incense him,

And let him cry “Ha!” louder.

O, my lord,

Press not a falling man too far! ’Tis virtue.

His faults lie open to the laws; let them,

Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him

So little of his great self.

We are.

This is the King’s ring.

’Tis now too certain.

How much more is his life in value with him!

Would I were fairly out on ’t!

Mercy o’ me, what a multitude are here!

They grow still too. From all parts they are coming,

As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,

These lazy knaves?—You’ve made a fine hand, fellows!

There’s a trim rabble let in. Are all these

Your faithful friends o’ th’ suburbs? We shall have

Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,

When they pass back from the christening!

As I live,

If the King blame me for ’t, I’ll lay you all

By th’ heels, and suddenly, and on your heads

Clap round fines for neglect. You’re lazy knaves,

And here you lie baiting of bombards, when

You should do service. Hark, the trumpets sound!

They’re come already from the christening.

Go break among the press, and find a way out

To let the troop pass fairly, or I’ll find

A Marshalsea shall hold you play these two months.

