
But to be commanded

Forever by your Grace, whose hand has raised me.

It’s one o’clock, boy, is ’t not?

These should be hours for necessities,

Not for delights; times to repair our nature

With comforting repose, and not for us

To waste these times.—Good hour of night, Sir Thomas.

Whither so late?

I did, Sir Thomas, and left him at primero

With the Duke of Suffolk.

Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What’s the matter?

It seems you are in haste. An if there be

No great offense belongs to ’t, give your friend

Some touch of your late business. Affairs that walk,

As they say spirits do, at midnight have

In them a wilder nature than the business

That seeks dispatch by day.

The fruit she goes with

I pray for heartily, that it may find

Good time and live; but for the stock, Sir Thomas,

I wish it grubbed up now.

But, sir, sir,

Hear me, Sir Thomas. You’re a gentleman

Of mine own way. I know you wise, religious;

And let me tell you, it will ne’er be well,

’Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take ’t of me,

Till Cranmer, Cromwell—her two hands—and she

Sleep in their graves.

Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,

There are that dare, and I myself have ventured

To speak my mind of him. And indeed this day,

Sir—I may tell it you, I think—I have

Incensed the lords o’ th’ Council that he is—

For so I know he is, they know he is—

A most arch heretic, a pestilence

That does infect the land; with which they, moved,

Have broken with the King, who hath so far

Given ear to our complaint, of his great grace

And princely care foreseeing those fell mischiefs

Our reasons laid before him, hath commanded

Tomorrow morning to the Council board

He be convented. He’s a rank weed, Sir Thomas,

And we must root him out. From your affairs

I hinder you too long. Goodnight, Sir Thomas.

Has he had knowledge of it?

Yes.

Which reformation must be sudden too,

My noble lords; for those that tame wild horses

Pace ’em not in their hands to make ’em gentle,

But stop their mouths with stubborn bits, and spur ’em

Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,

Out of our easiness and childish pity

To one man’s honor, this contagious sickness,

Farewell, all physic. And what follows then?

Commotions, uproars, with a general taint

Of the whole state, as of late days our neighbors,

The upper Germany, can dearly witness,

Yet freshly pitied in our memories.

My lord, because we have business of more moment,

We will be short with you. ’Tis his Highness’ pleasure,

And our consent, for better trial of you

From hence you be committed to the Tower,

Where, being but a private man again,

You shall know many dare accuse you boldly—

More than, I fear, you are provided for.

My lord, my lord, you are a sectary.

That’s the plain truth. Your painted gloss discovers,

To men that understand you, words and weakness.

Good Master Secretary—

I cry your Honor mercy—you may worst

Of all this table say so.

Do not I know you for a favorer

Of this new sect? You are not sound.

Not sound, I say.

I shall remember this bold language.

I have done.

We are.

What other

Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome.

Let some o’ th’ guard be ready there.

Receive him,

And see him safe i’ th’ Tower.

Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven

In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince,

Not only good and wise, but most religious;

One that in all obedience makes the Church

The chief aim of his honor, and to strengthen

That holy duty out of dear respect,

His royal self in judgment comes to hear

The cause betwixt her and this great offender.

With a true heart

And brother-love I do it.

