


Whither away so fast?

I’ll save you

That labor, sir. All’s now done but the ceremony

Of bringing back the prisoner.

Yes, indeed was I.

You may guess quickly what.

Yes, truly, is he, and condemned upon ’t.

So are a number more.

I’ll tell you in a little. The great duke

Came to the bar, where to his accusations

He pleaded still not guilty and alleged

Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.

The King’s attorney on the contrary

Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions

Of divers witnesses, which the Duke desired

To him brought viva voce to his face;

At which appeared against him his surveyor,

Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor, and John Car,

Confessor to him, with that devil monk,

Hopkins, that made this mischief.

The same.

All these accused him strongly, which he fain

Would have flung from him, but indeed he could not.

And so his peers upon this evidence

Have found him guilty of high treason. Much

He spoke, and learnèdly, for life, but all

Was either pitied in him or forgotten.

When he was brought again to th’ bar to hear

His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirred

With such an agony he sweat extremely

And something spoke in choler, ill and hasty.

But he fell to himself again, and sweetly

In all the rest showed a most noble patience.

Sure he does not;

He never was so womanish. The cause

He may a little grieve at.

’Tis likely,

By all conjectures; first, Kildare’s attainder,

Then Deputy of Ireland, who, removed,

Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,

Lest he should help his father.

At his return

No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,

And generally: whoever the King favors,

The Card’nal instantly will find employment,

And far enough from court too.

Stay there, sir,

And see the noble ruined man you speak of.

O, this is full of pity, sir! It calls,

I fear, too many curses on their heads

That were the authors.

Good angels keep it from us!

What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?

Let me have it.

I do not talk much.

Yes, but it held not;

For when the King once heard it, out of anger

He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight

To stop the rumor and allay those tongues

That durst disperse it.

’Tis the Cardinal;

And merely to revenge him on the Emperor

For not bestowing on him at his asking

The archbishopric of Toledo this is purposed.

’Tis woeful.

We are too open here to argue this.

Let’s think in private more.

You’re well met once again.

You come to take your stand here and behold

The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?

’Tis very true. But that time offered sorrow,

This general joy.

Never greater,

Nor, I’ll assure you, better taken, sir.

Yes, ’tis the list

Of those that claim their offices this day

By custom of the coronation.

The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims

To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,

He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest.

That I can tell you too. The Archbishop

Of Canterbury, accompanied with other

Learnèd and reverend fathers of his order,

Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles off

From Ampthill, where the Princess lay, to which

She was often cited by them, but appeared not;

And, to be short, for not appearance and

The King’s late scruple, by the main assent

Of all these learnèd men she was divorced,

And the late marriage made of none effect;

Since which she was removed to Kymmalton,

Where she remains now sick.

Marques Dorset,

And that the Earl of Surrey with the rod.

’Tis the same: High Steward.

Yes.

They that bear

The cloth of honor over her are four barons

Of the Cinque-ports.

It is, and all the rest are countesses.

And sometimes falling ones.

God save you, sir. Where have you been broiling?

How was it?

Sir,

You must no more call it “York Place”; that’s past,

For since the Cardinal fell, that title’s lost.

’Tis now the King’s and called “Whitehall.”

You may command us, sir.

