


Among the crowd i’ th’ Abbey, where a finger

Could not be wedged in more. I am stifled

With the mere rankness of their joy.

That I did.

Well worth the seeing.

As well as I am able. The rich stream

Of lords and ladies, having brought the Queen

To a prepared place in the choir, fell off

A distance from her, while her Grace sat down

To rest awhile, some half an hour or so,

In a rich chair of state, opposing freely

The beauty of her person to the people.

Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman

That ever lay by man, which when the people

Had the full view of, such a noise arose

As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest—

As loud and to as many tunes. Hats, cloaks,

Doublets, I think, flew up, and had their faces

Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy

I never saw before. Great-bellied women

That had not half a week to go, like rams

In the old time of war, would shake the press

And make ’em reel before ’em. No man living

Could say “This is my wife there,” all were woven

So strangely in one piece.

At length her Grace rose, and with modest paces

Came to the altar, where she kneeled and saintlike

Cast her fair eyes to heaven and prayed devoutly,

Then rose again and bowed her to the people.

When by the Archbishop of Canterbury

She had all the royal makings of a queen—

As, holy oil, Edward Confessor’s crown,

The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems—

Laid nobly on her; which performed, the choir,

With all the choicest music of the kingdom,

Together sung Te Deum. So she parted,

And with the same full state paced back again

To York Place, where the feast is held.

I know it,

But ’tis so lately altered that the old name

Is fresh about me.

Stokeley and Gardiner, the one of Winchester,

Newly preferred from the King’s secretary,

The other London.

All the land knows that.

However, yet there is no great breach. When it comes,

Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.

Thomas Cromwell,

A man in much esteem with th’ King, and truly

A worthy friend. The King has made him

Master o’ th’ Jewel House,

And one already of the Privy Council.

Yes, without all doubt.

Come, gentlemen, you shall go my way,

Which is to th’ court, and there you shall be my guests,

Something I can command. As I walk thither,

I’ll tell you more.

