


My life itself, and the best heart of it,

Thanks you for this great care. I stood i’ th’ level

Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks

To you that choked it.—Let be called before us

That gentleman of Buckingham’s; in person

I’ll hear him his confessions justify,

And point by point the treasons of his master

He shall again relate.

Arise, and take place by us.  Half your suit

Never name to us; you have half our power.

The other moiety ere you ask is given;

Repeat your will, and take it.

Lady mine, proceed.

Taxation?

Wherein? And what taxation? My Lord Cardinal,

You that are blamed for it alike with us,

Know you of this taxation?

Still exaction!

The nature of it? In what kind, let’s know,

Is this exaction?

By my life,

This is against our pleasure.

Things done well,

And with a care, exempt themselves from fear;

Things done without example, in their issue

Are to be feared. Have you a precedent

Of this commission? I believe, not any.

We must not rend our subjects from our laws

And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each?

A trembling contribution! Why, we take

From every tree lop, bark, and part o’ th’ timber,

And though we leave it with a root, thus hacked,

The air will drink the sap. To every county

Where this is questioned send our letters with

Free pardon to each man that has denied

The force of this commission. Pray look to ’t;

I put it to your care.

It grieves many.

The gentleman is learnèd and a most rare speaker;

To nature none more bound; his training such

That he may furnish and instruct great teachers

And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see,

When these so noble benefits shall prove

Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,

They turn to vicious forms ten times more ugly

Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,

Who was enrolled ’mongst wonders, and when we

Almost with ravished list’ning could not find

His hour of speech a minute—he, my lady,

Hath into monstrous habits put the graces

That once were his, and is become as black

As if besmeared in hell. Sit by us. You shall hear—

This was his gentleman in trust—of him

Things to strike honor sad.—Bid him recount

The fore-recited practices, whereof

We cannot feel too little, hear too much.

Speak freely.

Speak on.

How grounded he his title to the crown

Upon our fail? To this point hast thou heard him

At any time speak aught?

What was that Henton?

How know’st thou this?

Let him on.—

Go forward.

Ha! What, so rank? Ah ha!

There’s mischief in this man! Canst thou say further?

Proceed.

I remember of such a time, being my sworn servant,

The Duke retained him his. But on. What hence?

A giant traitor!

There’s something more would out of thee. What sayst?

There’s his period,

To sheathe his knife in us! He is attached.

Call him to present trial. If he may

Find mercy in the law, ’tis his; if none,

Let him not seek ’t of us. By day and night,

He’s traitor to th’ height!

The fairest hand I ever touched! O beauty,

Till now I never knew thee.

You have found him, cardinal.

You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord.

You are a churchman, or I’ll tell you, cardinal,

I should judge now unhappily.

My Lord Chamberlain,

Prithee come hither. What fair lady’s that?

By heaven, she is a dainty one.—Sweetheart,

I were unmannerly to take you out

And not to kiss you. A health, gentlemen!

Let it go round.

I fear, too much.

Lead in your ladies ev’ry one.—Sweet partner,

I must not yet forsake you.—Let’s be merry,

Good my Lord Cardinal. I have half a dozen healths

To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure

To lead ’em once again, and then let’s dream

Who’s best in favor. Let the music knock it.

Who’s there? Ha?

Who’s there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves

Into my private meditations? Who am I, ha?

You are too bold.

Go to; I’ll make you know your times of business.

Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?

Who’s there? My good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,

The quiet of my wounded conscience,

Thou art a cure fit for a king. You’re welcome,

Most learnèd reverend sir, into our kingdom.

Use us and it.—My good lord, have great care

I be not found a talker.

We are busy. Go.

And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,

And thank the holy conclave for their loves.

They have sent me such a man I would have wished for.

Two equal men. The Queen shall be acquainted

Forthwith for what you come. Where’s Gardiner?

Ay, and the best she shall have, and my favor

To him that does best. God forbid else. Cardinal,

Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new secretary.

I find him a fit fellow.

Come hither, Gardiner.

Deliver this with modesty to th’ Queen.

The most convenient place that I can think of

For such receipt of learning is Blackfriars.

There you shall meet about this weighty business.

My Wolsey, see it furnished. O, my lord,

Would it not grieve an able man to leave

So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!

O, ’tis a tender place, and I must leave her.

What’s the need?

It hath already publicly been read,

And on all sides th’ authority allowed.

You may then spare that time.

Here.

Call her again.

Go thy ways, Kate.

That man i’ th’ world who shall report he has

A better wife, let him in naught be trusted,

For speaking false in that. Thou art, alone—

If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,

Thy meekness saintlike, wifelike government,

Obeying in commanding, and thy parts

Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out—

The queen of earthly queens. She’s noble born,

And like her true nobility she has

Carried herself towards me.

My Lord Cardinal,

I do excuse you; yea, upon mine honor,

I free you from ’t. You are not to be taught

That you have many enemies that know not

Why they are so but, like to village curs,

Bark when their fellows do. By some of these

The Queen is put in anger. You’re excused.

But will you be more justified? You ever

Have wished the sleeping of this business, never desired

It to be stirred, but oft have hindered, oft,

The passages made toward it. On my honor

I speak my good Lord Cardinal to this point

And thus far clear him. Now, what moved me to ’t,

I will be bold with time and your attention.

Then mark th’ inducement. Thus it came; give heed to ’t:

My conscience first received a tenderness,

Scruple, and prick on certain speeches uttered

By th’ Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,

Who had been hither sent on the debating

A marriage ’twixt the Duke of Orleans and

Our daughter Mary. I’ th’ progress of this business,

Ere a determinate resolution, he,

I mean the Bishop, did require a respite

Wherein he might the King his lord advertise

Whether our daughter were legitimate,

Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,

Sometime our brother’s wife. This respite shook

The bosom of my conscience, entered me,

Yea, with a spitting power, and made to tremble

The region of my breast; which forced such way

That many mazed considerings did throng

And pressed in with this caution. First, methought

I stood not in the smile of heaven, who had

Commanded nature that my lady’s womb,

If it conceived a male child by me, should

Do no more offices of life to ’t than

The grave does to th’ dead, for her male issue

Or died where they were made, or shortly after

This world had aired them. Hence I took a thought

This was a judgment on me, that my kingdom,

Well worthy the best heir o’ th’ world, should not

Be gladded in ’t by me. Then follows that

I weighed the danger which my realms stood in

By this my issue’s fail, and that gave to me

Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in

The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer

Toward this remedy whereupon we are

Now present here together. That’s to say,

I meant to rectify my conscience, which

I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,

By all the reverend fathers of the land

And doctors learnèd. First, I began in private

With you, my Lord of Lincoln. You remember

How under my oppression I did reek

When I first moved you.

I have spoke long. Be pleased yourself to say

How far you satisfied me.

I then moved you,

My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave

To make this present summons. Unsolicited

I left no reverend person in this court,

But by particular consent proceeded

Under your hands and seals. Therefore go on,

For no dislike i’ th’ world against the person

Of the good queen, but the sharp thorny points

Of my allegèd reasons drives this forward.

Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life

And kingly dignity, we are contented

To wear our mortal state to come with her,

Katherine our queen, before the primest creature

That’s paragoned o’ th’ world.

I may perceive

These cardinals trifle with me. I abhor

This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.

My learnèd and well-belovèd servant Cranmer,

Prithee return. With thy approach, I know,

My comfort comes along.—Break up the court.

I say, set on.

What piles of wealth hath he accumulated

To his own portion! And what expense by th’ hour

Seems to flow from him! How i’ th’ name of thrift

Does he rake this together? Now, my lords,

Saw you the Cardinal?

It may well be

There is a mutiny in ’s mind. This morning

Papers of state he sent me to peruse,

As I required, and wot you what I found?

There—on my conscience, put unwittingly—

Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing

The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,

Rich stuffs and ornaments of household, which

I find at such proud rate that it outspeaks

Possession of a subject.

If we did think

His contemplation were above the Earth

And fixed on spiritual object, he should still

Dwell in his musings, but I am afraid

His thinkings are below the moon, not worth

His serious considering.

Good my lord,

You are full of heavenly stuff and bear the inventory

Of your best graces in your mind, the which

You were now running o’er. You have scarce time

To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span

To keep your earthly audit. Sure, in that

I deem you an ill husband, and am glad

To have you therein my companion.

You have said well.

’Tis well said again,

And ’tis a kind of good deed to say well.

And yet words are no deeds. My father loved you;

He said he did, and with his deed did crown

His word upon you. Since I had my office

I have kept you next my heart, have not alone

Employed you where high profits might come home,

But pared my present havings to bestow

My bounties upon you.

Have I not made you

The prime man of the state? I pray you tell me

If what I now pronounce you have found true;

And, if you may confess it, say withal

If you are bound to us or no. What say you?

Fairly answered.

A loyal and obedient subject is

Therein illustrated. The honor of it

Does pay the act of it, as, i’ th’ contrary,

The foulness is the punishment. I presume

That, as my hand has opened bounty to you,

My heart dropped love, my power rained honor, more

On you than any, so your hand and heart,

Your brain, and every function of your power

Should—notwithstanding that your bond of duty

As ’twere in love’s particular—be more

To me, your friend, than any.

’Tis nobly spoken.—

Take notice, lords: he has a loyal breast,

For you have seen him open ’t.  Read o’er this,

And after, this; and then to breakfast with

What appetite you have.

Charles, I will play no more tonight.

My mind’s not on ’t; you are too hard for me.

But little, Charles,

Nor shall not when my fancy’s on my play.—

Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news?

What sayst thou, ha?

To pray for her? What, is she crying out?

Alas, good lady!

’Tis midnight, Charles.

Prithee, to bed, and in thy prayers remember

Th’ estate of my poor queen. Leave me alone,

For I must think of that which company

Would not be friendly to.

Charles, good night.

Well, sir, what follows?

Ha! Canterbury?

’Tis true. Where is he, Denny?

Bring him to us.

Avoid the gallery. Ha! I have said. Be gone!

What!

How now, my lord? You do desire to know

Wherefore I sent for you.

Pray you arise,

My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.

Come, you and I must walk a turn together.

I have news to tell you. Come, come, give me your hand.

Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak,

And am right sorry to repeat what follows.

I have, and most unwillingly, of late

Heard many grievous—I do say, my lord,

Grievous—complaints of you, which, being considered,

Have moved us and our Council that you shall

This morning come before us, where I know

You cannot with such freedom purge yourself

But that, till further trial in those charges

Which will require your answer, you must take

Your patience to you and be well contented

To make your house our Tower. You a brother of us,

It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness

Would come against you.

Stand up, good Canterbury!

Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted

In us, thy friend. Give me thy hand. Stand up.

Prithee, let’s walk. Now by my halidom,

What manner of man are you? My lord, I looked

You would have given me your petition that

I should have ta’en some pains to bring together

Yourself and your accusers and to have heard you

Without endurance further.

Know you not

How your state stands i’ th’ world, with the whole world?

Your enemies are many and not small; their practices

Must bear the same proportion, and not ever

The justice and the truth o’ th’ question carries

The due o’ th’ verdict with it. At what ease

Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt

To swear against you? Such things have been done.

You are potently opposed, and with a malice

Of as great size. Ween you of better luck,

I mean in perjured witness, than your master,

Whose minister you are, whiles here he lived

Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to.

You take a precipice for no leap of danger

And woo your own destruction.

Be of good cheer.

They shall no more prevail than we give way to.

Keep comfort to you, and this morning see

You do appear before them. If they shall chance,

In charging you with matters, to commit you,

The best persuasions to the contrary

Fail not to use, and with what vehemency

Th’ occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties

Will render you no remedy, this ring

Deliver them, and your appeal to us

There make before them. Look, the good man weeps!

He’s honest, on mine honor! God’s blest mother,

I swear he is truehearted, and a soul

None better in my kingdom.—Get you gone,

And do as I have bid you. He has strangled

His language in his tears.

Now by thy looks

I guess thy message. Is the Queen delivered?

Say “Ay, and of a boy.”

Lovell.

Give her an hundred marks. I’ll to the Queen.

What’s that, Butts?

Body o’ me, where is it?

Ha! ’Tis he indeed.

Is this the honor they do one another?

’Tis well there’s one above ’em yet. I had thought

They had parted so much honesty among ’em—

At least good manners—as not thus to suffer

A man of his place, and so near our favor,

To dance attendance on their Lordships’ pleasures,

And at the door, too, like a post with packets.

By holy Mary, Butts, there’s knavery!

Let ’em alone, and draw the curtain close.

We shall hear more anon.

You were ever good at sudden commendations,

Bishop of Winchester. But know I come not

To hear such flattery now, and in my presence

They are too thin and base to hide offenses.

To me you cannot reach. You play the spaniel,

And think with wagging of your tongue to win me;

But whatsoe’er thou tak’st me for, I’m sure

Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.—

Good man, sit down. Now let me see the proudest

He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee.

By all that’s holy, he had better starve

Than but once think this place becomes thee not.

No, sir, it does not please me.

I had thought I had had men of some understanding

And wisdom of my Council, but I find none.

Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,

This good man—few of you deserve that title—

This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy

At chamber door? And one as great as you are?

Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission

Bid you so far forget yourselves? I gave you

Power as he was a councillor to try him,

Not as a groom. There’s some of you, I see,

More out of malice than integrity,

Would try him to the utmost, had you mean,

Which you shall never have while I live.

Well, well, my lords, respect him.

Take him, and use him well; he’s worthy of it.

I will say thus much for him: if a prince

May be beholding to a subject, I

Am, for his love and service, so to him.

Make me no more ado, but all embrace him.

Be friends, for shame, my lords.  My Lord of Canterbury,

I have a suit which you must not deny me:

That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism.

You must be godfather and answer for her.

Come, come, my lord, you’d spare your spoons.

You shall have two noble partners with you: the

old Duchess of Norfolk and Lady Marquess Dorset.

Will these please you?—

Once more, my lord of Winchester, I charge you,

Embrace and love this man.

Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart.

The common voice, I see, is verified

Of thee, which says thus: “Do my Lord of Canterbury

A shrewd turn, and he’s your friend forever.”—

Come, lords, we trifle time away. I long

To have this young one made a Christian.

As I have made you one, lords, one remain.

So I grow stronger, you more honor gain.

Thank you, good lord Archbishop.

What is her name?

Stand up, lord.

With this kiss take my blessing. God protect thee,

Into whose hand I give thy life.

My noble gossips, you’ve been too prodigal.

I thank you heartily; so shall this lady

When she has so much English.

Thou speakest wonders.

O lord Archbishop,

Thou hast made me now a man. Never before

This happy child did I get anything.

This oracle of comfort has so pleased me

That when I am in heaven I shall desire

To see what this child does and praise my Maker.—

I thank you all.—To you, my good lord mayor

And you, good brethren, I am much beholding.

I have received much honor by your presence,

And you shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords.

You must all see the Queen, and she must thank you;

She will be sick else. This day, no man think

’Has business at his house, for all shall stay.

This little one shall make it holiday.

