


Your Lordship is right welcome back to

Denmark.

Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I

should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.

I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.

It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as

’twere—I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty

bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager

on your head. Sir, this is the matter—

Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.

Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes—believe

me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent

differences, of very soft society and great showing.

Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or

calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the

continent of what part a gentleman would see.

Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

Sir?

Of Laertes?

I know you are not ignorant—

You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes

is—

I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation

laid on him by them, in his meed he’s

unfellowed.

Rapier and dagger.

The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary

horses, against the which he has impawned, as I

take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their

assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the

carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very

responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and

of very liberal conceit.

The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen

passes between yourself and him, he shall not

exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for

nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your

Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person

in trial.

Shall I deliver you e’en so?

I commend my duty to your Lordship.

Ay, my good lord.

A hit, a very palpable hit.

Nothing neither way.

Look to the Queen there, ho!

How is ’t, Laertes?

Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,

To th’ ambassadors of England gives

This warlike volley.

