
Both your Majesties

Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,

Put your dread pleasures more into command

Than to entreaty.

God save you, sir.

My most dear lord.

As the indifferent children of the earth.

Neither, my lord.

None, my lord, but that the world’s

grown honest.

Then is the world one.

We think not so, my lord.

Why, then, your ambition makes it one.

’Tis too narrow for your mind.

Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy

and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.

We’ll wait upon you.

To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

To what end, my lord?

What say you?

My lord, there was no such stuff in my

thoughts.

To think, my lord, if you delight not in

man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall

receive from you. We coted them on the way, and

hither are they coming to offer you service.

Even those you were wont to take such

delight in, the tragedians of the city.

I think their inhibition comes by the

means of the late innovation.

No, indeed are they not.

Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted

pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little

eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are

most tyrannically clapped for ’t. These are now the

fashion and so berattle the common stages (so

they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid

of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.

Faith, there has been much to-do on

both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar

them to controversy. There was for a while no

money bid for argument unless the poet and the

player went to cuffs in the question.

Ay, that they do, my lord—Hercules

and his load too.

Haply he is the second time come to

them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

Good my lord.

He does confess he feels himself distracted,

But from what cause he will by no means speak.

Most like a gentleman.

Niggard of question, but of our demands

Most free in his reply.

Madam, it so fell out that certain players

We o’erraught on the way. Of these we told him,

And there did seem in him a kind of joy

To hear of it. They are here about the court,

And, as I think, they have already order

This night to play before him.

We shall, my lord.

Ay, my lord.

Ay, my lord. They stay upon your

patience.

What, my lord?

Then thus she says: your behavior hath

struck her into amazement and admiration.

She desires to speak with you in her

closet ere you go to bed.

My lord, you once did love me.

Good my lord, what is your cause of

distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your

own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

How can that be, when you have the

voice of the King himself for your succession in

Denmark?

The single and peculiar life is bound

With all the strength and armor of the mind

To keep itself from noyance, but much more

That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests

The lives of many. The cess of majesty

Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw

What’s near it with it; or it is a massy wheel

Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,

To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things

Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,

Each small annexment, petty consequence,

Attends the boist’rous ruin. Never alone

Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

We will haste us.

What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence

And bear it to the chapel.

Believe what?

Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

I understand you not, my lord.

My lord, you must tell us where the

body is and go with us to the King.

Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,

We cannot get from him.

Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

Ho! Bring in the lord.

Will ’t please you go, my lord?

