
My dread lord,

Your leave and favor to return to France,

From whence though willingly I came to Denmark

To show my duty in your coronation,

Yet now I must confess, that duty done,

My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France

And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.

And, sister, as the winds give benefit

And convey is assistant, do not sleep,

But let me hear from you.

For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,

Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,

A violet in the youth of primy nature,

Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,

The perfume and suppliance of a minute,

No more.

Think it no more.

For nature, crescent, does not grow alone

In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,

The inward service of the mind and soul

Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,

And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch

The virtue of his will; but you must fear,

His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,

For he himself is subject to his birth.

He may not, as unvalued persons do,

Carve for himself, for on his choice depends

The safety and the health of this whole state.

And therefore must his choice be circumscribed

Unto the voice and yielding of that body

Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves you,

It fits your wisdom so far to believe it

As he in his particular act and place

May give his saying deed, which is no further

Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.

Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain

If with too credent ear you list his songs

Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open

To his unmastered importunity.

Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,

And keep you in the rear of your affection,

Out of the shot and danger of desire.

The chariest maid is prodigal enough

If she unmask her beauty to the moon.

Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes.

The canker galls the infants of the spring

Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,

And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,

Contagious blastments are most imminent.

Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.

Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

O, fear me not.

I stay too long. But here my father comes.

A double blessing is a double grace.

Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well

What I have said to you.

Farewell.

Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.

I pray you, give me leave.

I thank you. Keep the door. O, thou vile king,

Give me my father!

That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me bastard,

Cries “cuckold” to my father, brands the harlot

Even here between the chaste unsmirchèd brow

Of my true mother.

Where is my father?

How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with.

To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!

Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!

I dare damnation. To this point I stand,

That both the worlds I give to negligence,

Let come what comes, only I’ll be revenged

Most throughly for my father.

My will, not all the world.

And for my means, I’ll husband them so well

They shall go far with little.

None but his enemies.

To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms

And, like the kind life-rend’ring pelican,

Repast them with my blood.

How now, what noise is that?

O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt

Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!

By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight

Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,

Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!

O heavens, is ’t possible a young maid’s wits

Should be as mortal as an old man’s life?

Nature is fine in love, and, where ’tis fine,

It sends some precious instance of itself

After the thing it loves.

Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,

It could not move thus.

This nothing’s more than matter.

A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance

fitted.

Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself

She turns to favor and to prettiness.

Do you see this, O God?

Let this be so.

His means of death, his obscure funeral

(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,

No noble rite nor formal ostentation)

Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,

That I must call ’t in question.

It well appears. But tell me

Why you proceeded not against these feats,

So criminal and so capital in nature,

As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,

You mainly were stirred up.

And so have I a noble father lost,

A sister driven into desp’rate terms,

Whose worth, if praises may go back again,

Stood challenger on mount of all the age

For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

Know you the hand?

I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.

It warms the very sickness in my heart

That I shall live and tell him to his teeth

“Thus didst thou.”

Ay, my lord,

So you will not o’errule me to a peace.

My lord, I will be ruled,

The rather if you could devise it so

That I might be the organ.

What part is that, my lord?

A Norman was ’t?

Upon my life, Lamord.

I know him well. He is the brooch indeed

And gem of all the nation.

What out of this, my lord?

Why ask you this?

To cut his throat i’ th’ church.

I will do ’t,

And for that purpose I’ll anoint my sword.

I bought an unction of a mountebank

So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,

Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,

Collected from all simples that have virtue

Under the moon, can save the thing from death

That is but scratched withal. I’ll touch my point

With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,

It may be death.

Drowned? O, where?

Alas, then she is drowned.

Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,

And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet

It is our trick; nature her custom holds,

Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,

The woman will be out.—Adieu, my lord.

I have a speech o’ fire that fain would blaze,

But that this folly drowns it.

What ceremony else?

What ceremony else?

Must there no more be done?

Lay her i’ th’ earth,

And from her fair and unpolluted flesh

May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,

A minist’ring angel shall my sister be

When thou liest howling.

O, treble woe

Fall ten times treble on that cursèd head

Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense

Deprived thee of!—Hold off the earth awhile,

Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.

Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,

Till of this flat a mountain you have made

T’ o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish head

Of blue Olympus.

 The devil take thy soul!

I am satisfied in nature,

Whose motive in this case should stir me most

To my revenge; but in my terms of honor

I stand aloof and will no reconcilement

Till by some elder masters of known honor

I have a voice and precedent of peace

To keep my name ungored. But till that time

I do receive your offered love like love

And will not wrong it.

Come, one for me.

You mock me, sir.

This is too heavy. Let me see another.

Come, my lord.

No.

Well, again.

A touch, a touch. I do confess ’t.

My lord, I’ll hit him now.

And yet it is almost against my conscience.

Say you so? Come on.

Have at you now!

Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.

I am justly killed with mine own treachery.

It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.

No med’cine in the world can do thee good.

In thee there is not half an hour’s life.

The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,

Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice

Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,

Never to rise again. Thy mother’s poisoned.

I can no more. The King, the King’s to blame.

He is justly served.

It is a poison tempered by himself.

Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.

Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee,

Nor thine on me.

