


Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,

And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.

Do not forever with thy vailèd lids

Seek for thy noble father in the dust.

Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die,

Passing through nature to eternity.

If it be,

Why seems it so particular with thee?

Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.

I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.

Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,

And sure I am two men there is not living

To whom he more adheres. If it will please you

To show us so much gentry and goodwill

As to expend your time with us awhile

For the supply and profit of our hope,

Your visitation shall receive such thanks

As fits a king’s remembrance.

Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.

And I beseech you instantly to visit

My too much changèd son.—Go, some of you,

And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

Ay, amen!

I doubt it is no other but the main—

His father’s death and our o’erhasty marriage.

More matter with less art.

Came this from Hamlet to her?

It may be, very like.

So he does indeed.

But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.

Did he receive you well?

Did you assay him to any pastime?

I shall obey you.

And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish

That your good beauties be the happy cause

Of Hamlet’s wildness. So shall I hope your virtues

Will bring him to his wonted way again,

To both your honors.

Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

The lady doth protest too much, methinks.

How fares my lord?

I’ll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,

I hear him coming.

Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

Why, how now, Hamlet?

Have you forgot me?

Nay, then I’ll set those to you that can speak.

What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?

Help, ho!

O me, what hast thou done?

O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

As kill a king?

What have I done, that thou dar’st wag thy tongue

In noise so rude against me?

Ay me, what act

That roars so loud and thunders in the index?

O Hamlet, speak no more!

Thou turn’st my eyes into my very soul,

And there I see such black and grainèd spots

As will not leave their tinct.

O, speak to me no more!

These words like daggers enter in my ears.

No more, sweet Hamlet!

No more!

Alas, he’s mad.

Alas, how is ’t with you,

That you do bend your eye on vacancy

And with th’ incorporal air do hold discourse?

Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,

And, as the sleeping soldiers in th’ alarm,

Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,

Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,

Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper

Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?

To whom do you speak this?

Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

No, nothing but ourselves.

This is the very coinage of your brain.

This bodiless creation ecstasy

Is very cunning in.

O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!

What shall I do?

Be thou assured, if words be made of breath

And breath of life, I have no life to breathe

What thou hast said to me.

Alack,

I had forgot! ’Tis so concluded on.

Bestow this place on us a little while.

Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!

Mad as the sea and wind when both contend

Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,

Behind the arras hearing something stir,

Whips out his rapier, cries “A rat, a rat,”

And in this brainish apprehension kills

The unseen good old man.

To draw apart the body he hath killed,

O’er whom his very madness, like some ore

Among a mineral of metals base,

Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.

I will not speak with her.

What would she have?

Let her come in.

To my sick soul (as sin’s true nature is),

Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.

So full of artless jealousy is guilt,

It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

How now, Ophelia?

Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

Nay, but Ophelia—

Alas, look here, my lord.

Alack, what noise is this?

How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.

O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!

Calmly, good Laertes.

But not by him.

One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,

So fast they follow. Your sister’s drowned, Laertes.

There is a willow grows askant the brook

That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.

Therewith fantastic garlands did she make

Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,

That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,

But our cold maids do “dead men’s fingers” call them.

There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds

Clamb’ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,

When down her weedy trophies and herself

Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,

And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,

Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,

As one incapable of her own distress

Or like a creature native and endued

Unto that element. But long it could not be

Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,

Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay

To muddy death.

Drowned, drowned.

Sweets to the sweet, farewell!

I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;

I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,

And not have strewed thy grave.

Hamlet! Hamlet!

O my son, what theme?

For love of God, forbear him.

This is mere madness;

And thus awhile the fit will work on him.

Anon, as patient as the female dove

When that her golden couplets are disclosed,

His silence will sit drooping.

He’s fat and scant of breath.—

Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.

The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.

Come, let me wipe thy face.

No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!

The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.

