


Calphurnia.

Calphurnia.

Stand you directly in Antonius’ way

When he doth run his course.—Antonius.

Forget not in your speed, Antonius,

To touch Calphurnia, for our elders say

The barren, touchèd in this holy chase,

Shake off their sterile curse.

Set on and leave no ceremony out.

Ha! Who calls?

Who is it in the press that calls on me?

I hear a tongue shriller than all the music

Cry “Caesar.” Speak. Caesar is turned to hear.

What man is that?

Set him before me. Let me see his face.

What sayst thou to me now? Speak once again.

He is a dreamer. Let us leave him. Pass.

Antonius.

Let me have men about me that are fat,

Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep a-nights.

Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look.

He thinks too much. Such men are dangerous.

Would he were fatter! But I fear him not.

Yet if my name were liable to fear,

I do not know the man I should avoid

So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,

He is a great observer, and he looks

Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,

As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music;

Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort

As if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit

That could be moved to smile at anything.

Such men as he be never at heart’s ease

Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,

And therefore are they very dangerous.

I rather tell thee what is to be feared

Than what I fear; for always I am Caesar.

Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,

And tell me truly what thou think’st of him.

Nor heaven nor Earth have been at peace tonight.

Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out

“Help ho, they murder Caesar!”—Who’s within?

Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,

And bring me their opinions of success.

Caesar shall forth. The things that threatened me

Ne’er looked but on my back. When they shall see

The face of Caesar, they are vanishèd.

What can be avoided

Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?

Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions

Are to the world in general as to Caesar.

Cowards die many times before their deaths;

The valiant never taste of death but once.

Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,

It seems to me most strange that men should fear,

Seeing that death, a necessary end,

Will come when it will come.    What say the augurers?

The gods do this in shame of cowardice.

Caesar should be a beast without a heart

If he should stay at home today for fear.

No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well

That Caesar is more dangerous than he.

We are two lions littered in one day,

And I the elder and more terrible.

And Caesar shall go forth.

Mark Antony shall say I am not well,

And for thy humor I will stay at home.

Here’s Decius Brutus; he shall tell them so.

And you are come in very happy time

To bear my greeting to the Senators

And tell them that I will not come today.

Cannot is false, and that I dare not, falser.

I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.

Shall Caesar send a lie?

Have I in conquest stretched mine arm so far,

To be afeard to tell graybeards the truth?

Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.

The cause is in my will. I will not come.

That is enough to satisfy the Senate.

But for your private satisfaction,

Because I love you, I will let you know.

Calphurnia here, my wife, stays me at home.

She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,

Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,

Did run pure blood; and many lusty Romans

Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.

And these does she apply for warnings and portents

And evils imminent, and on her knee

Hath begged that I will stay at home today.

And this way have you well expounded it.

How foolish do your fears seem now, Calphurnia!

I am ashamèd I did yield to them.

Give me my robe, for I will go.

And look where Publius is come to fetch me.

Welcome, Publius.—

What, Brutus, are you stirred so early too?—

Good morrow, Casca.—Caius Ligarius,

Caesar was ne’er so much your enemy

As that same ague which hath made you lean.—

What is ’t o’clock?

I thank you for your pains and courtesy.

See, Antony that revels long a-nights

Is notwithstanding up.—Good morrow, Antony.

Bid them prepare within.—

I am to blame to be thus waited for.

Now, Cinna.—Now, Metellus.—What, Trebonius,

I have an hour’s talk in store for you.

Remember that you call on me today;

Be near me that I may remember you.

Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,

And we, like friends, will straightway go together.

The ides of March are come.

What touches us ourself shall be last served.

What, is the fellow mad?

Are we all ready? What is now amiss

That Caesar and his Senate must redress?

I must prevent thee, Cimber.

These couchings and these lowly courtesies

Might fire the blood of ordinary men

And turn preordinance and first decree

Into the law of children. Be not fond

To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood

That will be thawed from the true quality

With that which melteth fools—I mean sweet words,

Low-crookèd curtsies, and base spaniel fawning.

Thy brother by decree is banishèd.

If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,

I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.

Know: Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause

Will he be satisfied.

What, Brutus?

I could be well moved, if I were as you.

If I could pray to move, prayers would move me.

But I am constant as the Northern Star,

Of whose true fixed and resting quality

There is no fellow in the firmament.

The skies are painted with unnumbered sparks;

They are all fire, and every one doth shine.

But there’s but one in all doth hold his place.

So in the world: ’tis furnished well with men,

And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive.

Yet in the number I do know but one

That unassailable holds on his rank,

Unshaked of motion; and that I am he

Let me a little show it, even in this:

That I was constant Cimber should be banished

And constant do remain to keep him so.

Hence. Wilt thou lift up Olympus?

Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?

Et tu, Brutè?—Then fall, Caesar.

Thy evil spirit, Brutus.

To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.

Ay, at Philippi.

