


Who is it that hath warned us to the walls?

In brief, we are the King of England’s subjects.

For him, and in his right, we hold this town.

That can we not. But he that proves the King,

To him will we prove loyal. Till that time

Have we rammed up our gates against the world.

Till you compound whose right is worthiest,

We for the worthiest hold the right from both.

Heralds, from off our towers we might behold

From first to last the onset and retire

Of both your armies, whose equality

By our best eyes cannot be censurèd.

Blood hath bought blood, and blows have answered blows,

Strength matched with strength, and power confronted power.

Both are alike, and both alike we like.

One must prove greatest. While they weigh so even,

We hold our town for neither, yet for both.

The King of England, when we know the King.

A greater power than we denies all this,

And till it be undoubted, we do lock

Our former scruple in our strong-barred gates,

Kings of our fear, until our fears resolved

Be by some certain king purged and deposed.

Hear us, great kings. Vouchsafe awhile to stay,

And I shall show you peace and fair-faced league,

Win you this city without stroke or wound,

Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds

That here come sacrifices for the field.

Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings.

That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanche,

Is near to England. Look upon the years

Of Louis the Dauphin and that lovely maid.

If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,

Where should he find it fairer than in Blanche?

If zealous love should go in search of virtue,

Where should he find it purer than in Blanche?

If love ambitious sought a match of birth,

Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanche?

Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,

Is the young Dauphin every way complete.

If not complete of, say he is not she,

And she again wants nothing, to name want,

If want it be not that she is not he.

He is the half part of a blessèd man,

Left to be finishèd by such as she,

And she a fair divided excellence,

Whose fullness of perfection lies in him.

O, two such silver currents when they join

Do glorify the banks that bound them in,

And two such shores to two such streams made one,

Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,

To these two princes, if you marry them.

This union shall do more than battery can

To our fast-closèd gates, for at this match,

With swifter spleen than powder can enforce,

The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope

And give you entrance. But without this match,

The sea enragèd is not half so deaf,

Lions more confident, mountains and rocks

More free from motion, no, not Death himself

In mortal fury half so peremptory

As we to keep this city.

Why answer not the double majesties

This friendly treaty of our threatened town?

