


O, take his mother’s thanks, a widow’s thanks,

Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength

To make a more requital to your love.

Stay for an answer to your embassy,

Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood.

My lord Chatillion may from England bring

That right in peace which here we urge in war,

And then we shall repent each drop of blood

That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.

Let me make answer: thy usurping son.

My bed was ever to thy son as true

As thine was to thy husband, and this boy

Liker in feature to his father Geoffrey

Than thou and John, in manners being as like

As rain to water or devil to his dam.

My boy a bastard? By my soul, I think

His father never was so true begot.

It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.

There’s a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.

Do, child, go to it grandam, child.

Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will

Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig.

There’s a good grandam.

Now shame upon you whe’er she does or no!

His grandam’s wrongs, and not his mother’s shames,

Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes,

Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee.

Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed

To do him justice and revenge on you.

Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and Earth,

Call not me slanderer. Thou and thine usurp

The dominations, royalties, and rights

Of this oppressèd boy. This is thy eldest son’s son,

Infortunate in nothing but in thee.

Thy sins are visited in this poor child.

The canon of the law is laid on him,

Being but the second generation

Removèd from thy sin-conceiving womb.

I have but this to say,

That he is not only plaguèd for her sin,

But God hath made her sin and her the plague

On this removèd issue, plagued for her,

And with her plague; her sin his injury,

Her injury the beadle to her sin,

All punished in the person of this child

And all for her. A plague upon her!

Ay, who doubts that? A will—a wicked will,

A woman’s will, a cankered grandam’s will.

Gone to be married? Gone to swear a peace?

False blood to false blood joined? Gone to be friends?

Shall Louis have Blanche and Blanche those provinces?

It is not so. Thou hast misspoke, misheard.

Be well advised; tell o’er thy tale again.

It cannot be; thou dost but say ’tis so.

I trust I may not trust thee, for thy word

Is but the vain breath of a common man.

Believe me, I do not believe thee, man.

I have a king’s oath to the contrary.

Thou shalt be punished for thus flighting me,

For I am sick and capable of fears,

Oppressed with wrongs and therefore full of fears,

A widow, husbandless, subject to fears,

A woman naturally born to fears.

And though thou now confess thou didst but jest,

With my vexed spirits I cannot take a truce,

But they will quake and tremble all this day.

What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?

Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?

What means that hand upon that breast of thine?

Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,

Like a proud river peering o’er his bounds?

Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?

Then speak again—not all thy former tale,

But this one word, whether thy tale be true.

O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,

Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die,

And let belief and life encounter so

As doth the fury of two desperate men

Which in the very meeting fall and die.

Louis marry Blanche?—O, boy, then where art thou?—

France friend with England? What becomes of me?

Fellow, be gone. I cannot brook thy sight.

This news hath made thee a most ugly man.

Which harm within itself so heinous is

As it makes harmful all that speak of it.

If thou that bidd’st me be content wert grim,

Ugly, and sland’rous to thy mother’s womb,

Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,

Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,

Patched with foul moles and eye-offending marks,

I would not care; I then would be content,

For then I should not love thee; no, nor thou

Become thy great birth, nor deserve a crown.

But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy,

Nature and Fortune joined to make thee great.

Of Nature’s gifts thou mayst with lilies boast,

And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O,

She is corrupted, changed, and won from thee;

Sh’ adulterates hourly with thine Uncle John,

And with her golden hand hath plucked on France

To tread down fair respect of sovereignty,

And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.

France is a bawd to Fortune and King John,

That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John.—

Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn?

Envenom him with words, or get thee gone

And leave those woes alone which I alone

Am bound to underbear.

Thou mayst, thou shalt, I will not go with thee.

I will instruct my sorrows to be proud,

For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop.

To me and to the state of my great grief

Let kings assemble, for my griefs so great

That no supporter but the huge firm Earth

Can hold it up. Here I and sorrows sit.

Here is my throne; bid kings come bow to it.

A wicked day, and not a holy day!

What hath this day deserved? What hath it done

That it in golden letters should be set

Among the high tides in the calendar?

Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,

This day of shame, oppression, perjury.

Or if it must stand still, let wives with child

Pray that their burdens may not fall this day,

Lest that their hopes prodigiously be crossed.

But on this day let seamen fear no wrack;

No bargains break that are not this day made;

This day, all things begun come to ill end,

Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!

You have beguiled me with a counterfeit

Resembling majesty, which, being touched and tried,

Proves valueless. You are forsworn, forsworn.

You came in arms to spill mine enemies’ blood,

But now in arms you strengthen it with yours.

The grappling vigor and rough frown of war

Is cold in amity and painted peace,

And our oppression hath made up this league.

Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured kings!

A widow cries; be husband to me, God!

Let not the hours of this ungodly day

Wear out the days in peace, but ere sunset

Set armèd discord ’twixt these perjured kings.

Hear me, O, hear me!

War, war, no peace! Peace is to me a war.

O Limoges, O Austria, thou dost shame

That bloody spoil. Thou slave, thou wretch, thou coward,

Thou little valiant, great in villainy,

Thou ever strong upon the stronger side,

Thou Fortune’s champion, that dost never fight

But when her humorous Ladyship is by

To teach thee safety. Thou art perjured too,

And sooth’st up greatness. What a fool art thou,

A ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear

Upon my party. Thou cold-blooded slave,

Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side?

Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend

Upon thy stars, thy fortune, and thy strength?

And dost thou now fall over to my foes?

Thou wear a lion’s hide! Doff it for shame,

And hang a calfskin on those recreant limbs.

O, lawful let it be

That I have room with Rome to curse awhile!

Good father cardinal, cry thou “Amen”

To my keen curses, for without my wrong

There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.

And for mine, too. When law can do no right,

Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong.

Law cannot give my child his kingdom here,

For he that holds his kingdom holds the law.

Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong,

How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?

Look to that, devil, lest that France repent

And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul.

What should he say, but as the Cardinal?

O Louis, stand fast! The devil tempts thee here

In likeness of a new untrimmèd bride.

 O, if thou grant my need,

Which only lives but by the death of faith,

That need must needs infer this principle:

That faith would live again by death of need.

O, then tread down my need, and faith mounts up;

Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down.

O, be removed from him, and answer well!

 O, upon my knee

Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,

Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom

Forethought by heaven!

That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,

His honor.—O, thine honor, Louis, thine honor!

O, fair return of banished majesty!

Lo, now, now see the issue of your peace!

No, I defy all counsel, all redress,

But that which ends all counsel, true redress.

Death, death, O amiable, lovely death,

Thou odoriferous stench, sound rottenness,

Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,

Thou hate and terror to prosperity,

And I will kiss thy detestable bones

And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows,

And ring these fingers with thy household worms,

And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust,

And be a carrion monster like thyself.

Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smil’st,

And buss thee as thy wife. Misery’s love,

O, come to me!

No, no, I will not, having breath to cry.

O, that my tongue were in the thunder’s mouth!

Then with a passion would I shake the world

And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy

Which cannot hear a lady’s feeble voice,

Which scorns a modern invocation.

Thou art not holy to belie me so.

I am not mad. This hair I tear is mine;

My name is Constance; I was Geoffrey’s wife;

Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost.

I am not mad; I would to heaven I were,

For then ’tis like I should forget myself.

O, if I could, what grief should I forget!

Preach some philosophy to make me mad,

And thou shalt be canonized, cardinal.

For, being not mad but sensible of grief,

My reasonable part produces reason

How I may be delivered of these woes,

And teaches me to kill or hang myself.

If I were mad, I should forget my son,

Or madly think a babe of clouts were he.

I am not mad. Too well, too well I feel

The different plague of each calamity.

To England, if you will.

Yes, that I will. And wherefore will I do it?

I tore them from their bonds and cried aloud

“O, that these hands could so redeem my son,

As they have given these hairs their liberty!”

But now I envy at their liberty,

And will again commit them to their bonds,

Because my poor child is a prisoner.

And father cardinal, I have heard you say

That we shall see and know our friends in heaven.

If that be true, I shall see my boy again;

For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,

To him that did but yesterday suspire,

There was not such a gracious creature born.

But now will canker sorrow eat my bud

And chase the native beauty from his cheek,

And he will look as hollow as a ghost,

As dim and meager as an ague’s fit,

And so he’ll die; and, rising so again,

When I shall meet him in the court of heaven

I shall not know him. Therefore never, never

Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.

He talks to me that never had a son.

Grief fills the room up of my absent child,

Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,

Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,

Remembers me of all his gracious parts,

Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;

Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?

Fare you well. Had you such a loss as I,

I could give better comfort than you do.

I will not keep this form upon my head

When there is such disorder in my wit.

O Lord! My boy, my Arthur, my fair son,

My life, my joy, my food, my all the world,

My widow-comfort and my sorrows’ cure!

