


Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.—

Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,

Richard, that robbed the lion of his heart

And fought the holy wars in Palestine,

By this brave duke came early to his grave.

And, for amends to his posterity,

At our importance hither is he come

To spread his colors, boy, in thy behalf,

And to rebuke the usurpation

Of thy unnatural uncle, English John.

Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.

A noble boy. Who would not do thee right?

Women and fools, break off your conference.—

King John, this is the very sum of all:

England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,

In right of Arthur do I claim of thee.

Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?

I do, my lord, and in her eye I find

A wonder or a wondrous miracle,

The shadow of myself formed in her eye,

Which, being but the shadow of your son,

Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow.

I do protest I never loved myself

Till now infixèd I beheld myself

Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.

Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love,

For I do love her most unfeignedly.

She is sad and passionate at your Highness’ tent.

Bethink you, father, for the difference

Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,

Or the light loss of England for a friend.

Forgo the easier.

Father, to arms!

I muse your Majesty doth seem so cold,

When such profound respects do pull you on.

Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.

What he hath won, that hath he fortified.

So hot a speed, with such advice disposed,

Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,

Doth want example. Who hath read or heard

Of any kindred action like to this?

There’s nothing in this world can make me joy.

Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale,

Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;

And bitter shame hath spoiled the sweet world’s taste,

That it yields naught but shame and bitterness.

All days of glory, joy, and happiness.

As heartily as he is glad he hath him.

But what shall I gain by young Arthur’s fall?

And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did.

Maybe he will not touch young Arthur’s life,

But hold himself safe in his prisonment.

Strong reasons makes strange actions. Let us go.

If you say ay, the King will not say no.

My Lord Melun, let this be copied out,

And keep it safe for our remembrance.

Return the precedent to these lords again,

That having our fair order written down,

Both they and we, perusing o’er these notes,

May know wherefore we took the Sacrament,

And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.

A noble temper dost thou show in this,

And great affections wrestling in thy bosom

Doth make an earthquake of nobility.

O, what a noble combat hast thou fought

Between compulsion and a brave respect!

Let me wipe off this honorable dew

That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks.

My heart hath melted at a lady’s tears,

Being an ordinary inundation,

But this effusion of such manly drops,

This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul,

Startles mine eyes and makes me more amazed

Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven

Figured quite o’er with burning meteors.

Lift up thy brow, renownèd Salisbury,

And with a great heart heave away this storm.

Commend these waters to those baby eyes

That never saw the giant world enraged,

Nor met with fortune other than at feasts

Full warm of blood, of mirth, of gossiping.

Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep

Into the purse of rich prosperity

As Louis himself.—So, nobles, shall you all,

That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.

And even there, methinks, an angel spake.

Look where the holy legate comes apace

To give us warrant from the hand of God,

And on our actions set the name of right

With holy breath.

Your Grace shall pardon me; I will not back.

I am too high-born to be propertied,

To be a secondary at control,

Or useful servingman and instrument

To any sovereign state throughout the world.

Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars

Between this chastised kingdom and myself

And brought in matter that should feed this fire;

And now ’tis far too huge to be blown out

With that same weak wind which enkindled it.

You taught me how to know the face of right,

Acquainted me with interest to this land,

Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart.

And come you now to tell me John hath made

His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me?

I, by the honor of my marriage bed,

After young Arthur claim this land for mine.

And now it is half conquered, must I back

Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?

Am I Rome’s slave? What penny hath Rome borne?

What men provided? What munition sent

To underprop this action? Is ’t not I

That undergo this charge? Who else but I,

And such as to my claim are liable,

Sweat in this business and maintain this war?

Have I not heard these islanders shout out

“Vive le Roi” as I have banked their towns?

Have I not here the best cards for the game

To win this easy match played for a crown?

And shall I now give o’er the yielded set?

No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.

Outside or inside, I will not return

Till my attempt so much be glorified

As to my ample hope was promisèd

Before I drew this gallant head of war

And culled these fiery spirits from the world

To outlook conquest and to win renown

Even in the jaws of danger and of death.

What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?

There end thy brave and turn thy face in peace.

We grant thou canst outscold us. Fare thee well.

We hold our time too precious to be spent

With such a brabbler.

We will attend to neither.

Strike up the drums, and let the tongue of war

Plead for our interest and our being here.

Strike up our drums to find this danger out.

The sun of heaven, methought, was loath to set,

But stayed and made the western welkin blush,

When English measured backward their own ground

In faint retire. O, bravely came we off,

When with a volley of our needless shot,

After such bloody toil, we bid good night

And wound our tott’ring colors clearly up,

Last in the field and almost lords of it.

Here. What news?

Ah, foul, shrewd news. Beshrew thy very heart!

I did not think to be so sad tonight

As this hath made me. Who was he that said

King John did fly an hour or two before

The stumbling night did part our weary powers?

Well, keep good quarter and good care tonight.

The day shall not be up so soon as I

To try the fair adventure of tomorrow.

