


Well, then, to work. Our cannon shall be bent

Against the brows of this resisting town.

Call for our chiefest men of discipline

To cull the plots of best advantages.

We’ll lay before this town our royal bones,

Wade to the marketplace in Frenchmen’s blood,

But we will make it subject to this boy.

A wonder, lady! Lo, upon thy wish

Our messenger Chatillion is arrived.—

What England says say briefly, gentle lord.

We coldly pause for thee. Chatillion, speak.

How much unlooked-for is this expedition.

Peace be to England, if that war return

From France to England, there to live in peace.

England we love, and for that England’s sake

With burden of our armor here we sweat.

This toil of ours should be a work of thine;

But thou from loving England art so far

That thou hast underwrought his lawful king,

Cut off the sequence of posterity,

Outfacèd infant state, and done a rape

Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.

Look here upon thy brother Geoffrey’s face.

These eyes, these brows, were molded out of his;

This little abstract doth contain that large

Which died in Geoffrey, and the hand of time

Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.

That Geoffrey was thy elder brother born,

And this his son. England was Geoffrey’s right,

And this is Geoffrey’s. In the name of God,

How comes it then that thou art called a king,

When living blood doth in these temples beat

Which owe the crown that thou o’ermasterest?

From that supernal judge that stirs good thoughts

In any breast of strong authority

To look into the blots and stains of right.

That judge hath made me guardian to this boy,

Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong,

And by whose help I mean to chastise it.

Excuse it is to beat usurping down.

Louis, determine what we shall do straight.

Peace, lady. Pause, or be more temperate.

It ill beseems this presence to cry aim

To these ill-tunèd repetitions.—

Some trumpet summon hither to the walls

These men of Angiers. Let us hear them speak

Whose title they admit, Arthur’s or John’s.

’Tis France, for England.

You loving men of Angiers, Arthur’s subjects,

Our trumpet called you to this gentle parle—

When I have said, make answer to us both.

Lo, in this right hand, whose protection

Is most divinely vowed upon the right

Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet,

Son to the elder brother of this man,

And king o’er him and all that he enjoys.

For this downtrodden equity we tread

In warlike march these greens before your town,

Being no further enemy to you

Than the constraint of hospitable zeal

In the relief of this oppressèd child

Religiously provokes. Be pleasèd then

To pay that duty which you truly owe

To him that owes it, namely, this young prince,

And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear

Save in aspect, hath all offense sealed up.

Our cannons’ malice vainly shall be spent

Against th’ invulnerable clouds of heaven,

And with a blessèd and unvexed retire,

With unbacked swords and helmets all unbruised,

We will bear home that lusty blood again

Which here we came to spout against your town,

And leave your children, wives, and you in peace.

But if you fondly pass our proffered offer,

’Tis not the roundure of your old-faced walls

Can hide you from our messengers of war,

Though all these English and their discipline

Were harbored in their rude circumference.

Then tell us, shall your city call us lord

In that behalf which we have challenged it?

Or shall we give the signal to our rage

And stalk in blood to our possession?

As many and as wellborn bloods as those—

Stand in his face to contradict his claim.

Amen, amen.—Mount, chevaliers! To arms!

It shall be so, and at the other hill

Command the rest to stand. God and our right!

England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood

In this hot trial more than we of France,

Rather lost more. And by this hand I swear

That sways the earth this climate overlooks,

Before we will lay down our just-borne arms,

We’ll put thee down, ’gainst whom these arms we bear,

Or add a royal number to the dead,

Gracing the scroll that tells of this war’s loss

With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.

Speak, citizens, for England. Who’s your king?

Know him in us, that here hold up his right.

Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?

Our thunder from the south

Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.

Speak England first, that hath been forward first

To speak unto this city. What say you?

What sayst thou, boy? Look in the lady’s face.

It likes us well.—Young princes, close your hands.

Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates.

Let in that amity which you have made,

For at Saint Mary’s Chapel presently

The rites of marriage shall be solemnized.—

Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?

I know she is not, for this match made up

Her presence would have interrupted much.

Where is she and her son? Tell me, who knows.

And by my faith, this league that we have made

Will give her sadness very little cure.—

Brother of England, how may we content

This widow lady? In her right we came,

Which we, God knows, have turned another way

To our own vantage.

’Tis true, fair daughter, and this blessèd day

Ever in France shall be kept festival.

To solemnize this day the glorious sun

Stays in his course and plays the alchemist,

Turning with splendor of his precious eye

The meager cloddy earth to glittering gold.

The yearly course that brings this day about

Shall never see it but a holy day.

By heaven, lady, you shall have no cause

To curse the fair proceedings of this day.

Have I not pawned to you my majesty?

Here comes the holy legate of the Pope.

Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.

I am perplexed and know not what to say.

Good reverend father, make my person yours,

And tell me how you would bestow yourself.

This royal hand and mine are newly knit,

And the conjunction of our inward souls

Married, in league, coupled, and linked together

With all religious strength of sacred vows.

The latest breath that gave the sound of words

Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love

Between our kingdoms and our royal selves;

And even before this truce, but new before,

No longer than we well could wash our hands

To clap this royal bargain up of peace,

God knows they were besmeared and overstained

With slaughter’s pencil, where revenge did paint

The fearful difference of incensèd kings.

And shall these hands, so lately purged of blood,

So newly joined in love, so strong in both,

Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet?

Play fast and loose with faith? So jest with heaven?

Make such unconstant children of ourselves

As now again to snatch our palm from palm,

Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage bed

Of smiling peace to march a bloody host

And make a riot on the gentle brow

Of true sincerity? O holy sir,

My reverend father, let it not be so!

Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose

Some gentle order, and then we shall be blest

To do your pleasure and continue friends.

I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith.

Thou shalt not need.—England, I will fall from thee.

Thy rage shall burn thee up, and thou shalt turn

To ashes ere our blood shall quench that fire.

Look to thyself. Thou art in jeopardy.

So, by a roaring tempest on the flood,

A whole armada of convicted sail

Is scattered and disjoined from fellowship.

What can go well when we have run so ill?

Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?

Arthur ta’en prisoner? Divers dear friends slain?

And bloody England into England gone,

O’erbearing interruption, spite of France?

Well could I bear that England had this praise,

So we could find some pattern of our shame.

Look who comes here! A grave unto a soul,

Holding th’ eternal spirit against her will

In the vile prison of afflicted breath.—

I prithee, lady, go away with me.

Patience, good lady. Comfort, gentle Constance.

O fair affliction, peace!

Bind up those tresses.—O, what love I note

In the fair multitude of those her hairs;

Where but by chance a silver drop hath fall’n,

Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends

Do glue themselves in sociable grief,

Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,

Sticking together in calamity.

Bind up your hairs.

You are as fond of grief as of your child.

I fear some outrage, and I’ll follow her.

