


Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!

To thee, King John, my holy errand is.

I, Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal

And from Pope Innocent the legate here,

Do in his name religiously demand

Why thou against the Church, our holy mother,

So willfully dost spurn, and force perforce

Keep Stephen Langton, chosen Archbishop

Of Canterbury, from that Holy See.

This, in our foresaid Holy Father’s name,

Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.

Then, by the lawful power that I have,

Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate;

And blessèd shall he be that doth revolt

From his allegiance to an heretic;

And meritorious shall that hand be called,

Canonizèd and worshiped as a saint,

That takes away by any secret course

Thy hateful life.

There’s law and warrant, lady, for my curse.

Philip of France, on peril of a curse,

Let go the hand of that arch-heretic,

And raise the power of France upon his head

Unless he do submit himself to Rome.

What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,

If thou stand excommunicate and cursed?

All form is formless, order orderless,

Save what is opposite to England’s love.

Therefore to arms! Be champion of our Church,

Or let the Church, our mother, breathe her curse,

A mother’s curse, on her revolting son.

France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,

A chafèd lion by the mortal paw,

A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,

Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.

So mak’st thou faith an enemy to faith,

And like a civil war sett’st oath to oath,

Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow

First made to God, first be to God performed,

That is, to be the champion of our Church!

What since thou swor’st is sworn against thyself

And may not be performèd by thyself,

For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss

Is not amiss when it is truly done;

And being not done where doing tends to ill,

The truth is then most done not doing it.

The better act of purposes mistook

Is to mistake again; though indirect,

Yet indirection thereby grows direct,

And falsehood falsehood cures, as fire cools fire

Within the scorchèd veins of one new-burned.

It is religion that doth make vows kept,

But thou hast sworn against religion

By what thou swear’st against the thing thou swear’st,

And mak’st an oath the surety for thy truth

Against an oath. The truth thou art unsure

To swear swears only not to be forsworn,

Else what a mockery should it be to swear?

But thou dost swear only to be forsworn,

And most forsworn to keep what thou dost swear.

Therefore thy later vows against thy first

Is in thyself rebellion to thyself.

And better conquest never canst thou make

Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts

Against these giddy loose suggestions,

Upon which better part our prayers come in,

If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know

The peril of our curses light on thee

So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,

But in despair die under their black weight.

I will denounce a curse upon his head.

Courage and comfort. All shall yet go well.

Lady, you utter madness and not sorrow.

You hold too heinous a respect of grief.

Before the curing of a strong disease,

Even in the instant of repair and health,

The fit is strongest. Evils that take leave

On their departure most of all show evil.

What have you lost by losing of this day?

If you had won it, certainly you had.

No, no. When Fortune means to men most good,

She looks upon them with a threat’ning eye.

’Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost

In this which he accounts so clearly won.

Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?

Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.

Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit.

For even the breath of what I mean to speak

Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,

Out of the path which shall directly lead

Thy foot to England’s throne. And therefore mark:

John hath seized Arthur, and it cannot be

That, whiles warm life plays in that infant’s veins,

The misplaced John should entertain an hour,

One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.

A scepter snatched with an unruly hand

Must be as boisterously maintained as gained.

And he that stands upon a slipp’ry place

Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up.

That John may stand, then Arthur needs must fall.

So be it, for it cannot be but so.

You, in the right of Lady Blanche your wife,

May then make all the claim that Arthur did.

How green you are and fresh in this old world!

John lays you plots. The times conspire with you,

For he that steeps his safety in true blood

Shall find but bloody safety, and untrue.

This act so evilly borne shall cool the hearts

Of all his people and freeze up their zeal,

That none so small advantage shall step forth

To check his reign but they will cherish it.

No natural exhalation in the sky,

No scope of nature, no distempered day,

No common wind, no customèd event,

But they will pluck away his natural cause

And call them meteors, prodigies, and signs,

Abortives, presages, and tongues of heaven,

Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.

O, sir, when he shall hear of your approach,

If that young Arthur be not gone already,

Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts

Of all his people shall revolt from him

And kiss the lips of unacquainted change,

And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath

Out of the bloody fingers’ ends of John.

Methinks I see this hurly all on foot;

And, O, what better matter breeds for you

Than I have named! The bastard Faulconbridge

Is now in England ransacking the Church,

Offending charity. If but a dozen French

Were there in arms, they would be as a call

To train ten thousand English to their side,

Or as a little snow, tumbled about,

Anon becomes a mountain. O noble dauphin,

Go with me to the King. ’Tis wonderful

What may be wrought out of their discontent,

Now that their souls are topful of offense.

For England, go. I will whet on the King.

Take again

From this my hand, as holding of the Pope,

Your sovereign greatness and authority.

It was my breath that blew this tempest up,

Upon your stubborn usage of the Pope;

But since you are a gentle convertite,

My tongue shall hush again this storm of war

And make fair weather in your blust’ring land.

On this Ascension Day, remember well:

Upon your oath of service to the Pope,

Go I to make the French lay down their arms.

Hail, noble prince of France.

The next is this: King John hath reconciled

Himself to Rome; his spirit is come in

That so stood out against the holy Church,

The great metropolis and See of Rome.

Therefore thy threat’ning colors now wind up,

And tame the savage spirit of wild war

That, like a lion fostered up at hand,

It may lie gently at the foot of peace

And be no further harmful than in show.

You look but on the outside of this work.

The Dauphin is too willful-opposite

And will not temporize with my entreaties.

He flatly says he’ll not lay down his arms.

Give me leave to speak.

