


Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,

Live registered upon our brazen tombs,

And then grace us in the disgrace of death,

When, spite of cormorant devouring time,

Th’ endeavor of this present breath may buy

That honor which shall bate his scythe’s keen edge

And make us heirs of all eternity.

Therefore, brave conquerors, for so you are

That war against your own affections

And the huge army of the world’s desires,

Our late edict shall strongly stand in force.

Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;

Our court shall be a little academe,

Still and contemplative in living art.

You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longaville,

Have sworn for three years’ term to live with me,

My fellow scholars, and to keep those statutes

That are recorded in this schedule here.

Your oaths are passed, and now subscribe your names,

That his own hand may strike his honor down

That violates the smallest branch herein.

If you are armed to do as sworn to do,

Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.

Your oath is passed to pass away from these.

Why, that to know which else we should not know.

Ay, that is study’s godlike recompense.

These be the stops that hinder study quite,

And train our intellects to vain delight.

How well he’s read to reason against reading.

Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost

That bites the firstborn infants of the spring.

Well, sit you out. Go home, Berowne. Adieu.

How well this yielding rescues thee from shame.

What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.

We must of force dispense with this decree.

She must lie here on mere necessity.

Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted

With a refinèd traveler of Spain,

A man in all the world’s new fashion planted,

That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;

One who the music of his own vain tongue

Doth ravish like enchanting harmony,

A man of compliments, whom right and wrong

Have chose as umpire of their mutiny.

This child of fancy, that Armado hight,

For interim to our studies shall relate

In high-born words the worth of many a knight

From tawny Spain lost in the world’s debate.

How you delight, my lords, I know not, I,

But I protest I love to hear him lie,

And I will use him for my minstrelsy.

A letter from the magnificent Armado.

Will you hear this letter with attention?

Great deputy, the welkin’s vicegerent and

sole dominator of Navarre, my soul’s earth’s god, and

body’s fost’ring patron—

So it is—

Peace.

No words.

So it is, besieged with sable-colored melancholy,

I did commend the black oppressing humor

to the most wholesome physic of thy health-giving air;

and, as I am a gentleman, betook myself to walk. The

time when? About the sixth hour, when beasts most

graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that

nourishment which is called supper. So much for the

time when. Now for the ground which—which, I

mean, I walked upon. It is yclept thy park. Then for the

place where—where, I mean, I did encounter that

obscene and most prepost’rous event that draweth

from my snow-white pen the ebon-colored ink, which

here thou viewest, beholdest, surveyest, or seest. But to

the place where. It standeth north-north-east and by

east from the west corner of thy curious-knotted

garden. There did I see that low-spirited swain, that

base minnow of thy mirth,—

that unlettered, small-knowing soul,—

that shallow vassal,—

which, as I remember, hight Costard,—

sorted and consorted, contrary to thy

established proclaimed edict and continent canon,

which with—O with—but with this I passion to say

wherewith—

with a child of our grandmother Eve, a

female; or, for thy more sweet understanding, a

woman: him, I, as my ever-esteemed duty pricks

me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of

punishment by thy sweet Grace’s officer, Anthony

Dull, a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and

estimation.

For Jaquenetta—so is the weaker vessel

called which I apprehended with the aforesaid

swain—I keep her as a vessel of thy law’s fury, and

shall, at the least of thy sweet notice, bring her to trial.

Thine, in all compliments of devoted and heartburning

heat of duty,

Don Adriano de Armado.

Ay, the best, for the worst. But,

sirrah, what say you to this?

Did you hear the proclamation?

It was proclaimed a year’s imprisonment to be

taken with a wench.

Well, it was proclaimed “damsel.”

This “maid” will not serve your turn, sir.

Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall

fast a week with bran and water.

And Don Armado shall be your keeper.

My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o’er,

And go we, lords, to put in practice that

Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.

Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.

You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.

Hear me, dear lady. I have sworn an oath.

Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.

Your Ladyship is ignorant what it is.

Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.

Madam, your father here doth intimate

The payment of a hundred thousand crowns,

Being but the one half of an entire sum

Disbursèd by my father in his wars.

But say that he or we, as neither have,

Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid

A hundred thousand more, in surety of the which

One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,

Although not valued to the money’s worth.

If then the King your father will restore

But that one half which is unsatisfied,

We will give up our right in Aquitaine,

And hold fair friendship with his Majesty.

But that, it seems, he little purposeth;

For here he doth demand to have repaid

A hundred thousand crowns, and not demands,

On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,

To have his title live in Aquitaine—

Which we much rather had depart withal,

And have the money by our father lent,

Than Aquitaine, so gelded as it is.

Dear Princess, were not his requests so far

From reason’s yielding, your fair self should make

A yielding ’gainst some reason in my breast,

And go well satisfied to France again.

I do protest I never heard of it;

And if you prove it, I’ll repay it back

Or yield up Aquitaine.

Satisfy me so.

It shall suffice me; at which interview

All liberal reason I will yield unto.

Meantime receive such welcome at my hand

As honor (without breach of honor) may

Make tender of to thy true worthiness.

You may not come, fair princess, within my gates,

But here without you shall be so received

As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,

Though so denied fair harbor in my house.

Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.

Tomorrow shall we visit you again.

Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.

Ay me!

So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not

To those fresh morning drops upon the rose

As thy eyebeams, when their fresh rays have smote

The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows.

Nor shines the silver moon one-half so bright

Through the transparent bosom of the deep

As doth thy face, through tears of mine, give light.

Thou shin’st in every tear that I do weep.

No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;

So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.

Do but behold the tears that swell in me,

And they thy glory through my grief will show.

But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep

My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.

O queen of queens, how far dost thou excel

No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.

How shall she know my griefs? I’ll drop the paper.

Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?

What, Longaville, and reading! Listen, ear.

In love, I hope! Sweet fellowship in shame.

And mine too, good Lord!

Come, sir, you blush! As his, your case is such.

You chide at him, offending twice as much.

You do not love Maria? Longaville

Did never sonnet for her sake compile,

Nor never lay his wreathèd arms athwart

His loving bosom to keep down his heart?

I have been closely shrouded in this bush

And marked you both, and for you both did blush.

I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,

Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.

“Ay, me!” says one. “O Jove!” the other cries.

One, her hairs were gold, crystal the other’s eyes.

You would for paradise break faith and troth,

And Jove, for your love, would infringe an oath.

What will Berowne say when that he shall hear

Faith infringed, which such zeal did swear?

How will he scorn, how will he spend his wit!

How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it!

For all the wealth that ever I did see,

I would not have him know so much by me.

Too bitter is thy jest.

Are we betrayed thus to thy overview?

Soft, whither away so fast?

A true man, or a thief, that gallops so?

What present hast thou there?

What makes treason here?

If it mar nothing neither,

The treason and you go in peace away together.

Berowne, read it over.  Where hadst thou it?

Where hadst thou it?

How now, what is in you? Why dost thou tear it?

What?

Hence, sirs. Away.

What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?

What zeal, what fury, hath inspired thee now?

My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon,

She an attending star scarce seen a light.

By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.

O, paradox! Black is the badge of hell,

The hue of dungeons and the school of night,

And beauty’s crest becomes the heavens well.

And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.

’Twere good yours did, for, sir, to tell you plain,

I’ll find a fairer face not washed today.

No devil will fright thee then so much as she.

But what of this? Are we not all in love?

Then leave this chat, and, good Berowne, now prove

Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.

Saint Cupid, then, and, soldiers, to the field!

And win them, too. Therefore let us devise

Some entertainment for them in their tents.

Away, away! No time shall be omitted

That will betime and may by us be fitted.

Say to her we have measured many miles

To tread a measure with her on this grass.

Blessèd are clouds, to do as such clouds do!

Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,

Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.

Then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.

Thou bidd’st me beg; this begging is not strange.

Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?

Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.

The music plays. Vouchsafe some motion to it.

But your legs should do it.

Why take we hands then?

More measure of this measure! Be not nice.

Prize you yourselves. What buys your company?

That can never be.

If you deny to dance, let’s hold more chat.

I am best pleased with that.

Farewell, mad wenches. You have simple wits.

Fair sir, God save you. Where’s the Princess?

That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.

A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,

That put Armado’s page out of his part!

All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day.

Construe my speeches better, if you may.

We came to visit you, and purpose now

To lead you to our court. Vouchsafe it, then.

Rebuke me not for that which you provoke.

The virtue of your eye must break my oath.

O, you have lived in desolation here,

Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.

How, madam? Russians?

We were descried. They’ll mock us now downright.

Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression

Some fair excuse.

Madam, I was.

I was, fair madam.

That more than all the world I did respect her.

Upon mine honor, no.

Despise me when I break this oath of mine.

What mean you, madam? By my life, my troth,

I never swore this lady such an oath.

My faith and this the Princess I did give.

I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.

Berowne, they will shame us. Let them not approach.

I say they shall not come.

Here is like to be a good

presence of Worthies. He presents Hector of Troy,

the swain Pompey the Great, the parish curate

Alexander, Armado’s page Hercules, the pedant

Judas Maccabaeus.

And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive,

These four will change habits and present the other five.

You are deceived. ’Tis not so.

The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.

Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.

I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.

How fares your Majesty?

Madam, not so. I do beseech you stay.

The extreme parts of time extremely forms

All causes to the purpose of his speed,

And often at his very loose decides

That which long process could not arbitrate.

And though the mourning brow of progeny

Forbid the smiling courtesy of love

The holy suit which fain it would convince,

Yet since love’s argument was first on foot,

Let not the cloud of sorrow jostle it

From what it purposed, since to wail friends lost

Is not by much so wholesome-profitable

As to rejoice at friends but newly found.

Now, at the latest minute of the hour,

Grant us your loves.

If this, or more than this, I would deny,

To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,

The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!

Hence hermit, then. My heart is in thy breast.

No, madam, we will bring you on your way.

Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day,

And then ’twill end.

Call them forth quickly. We will do so.

