


A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.

No, no. O Lord, sir, no!

By a familiar demonstration of the working, my

tough signior.

Why “tender juvenal”? Why “tender juvenal”?

And I “tough signior” as an appurtenant title to

your old time, which we may name “tough.”

How mean you, sir? I pretty and my saying apt, or

I apt and my saying pretty?

Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?

Speak you this in my praise, master?

I will praise an eel with the same praise.

That an eel is quick.

I am answered, sir.

He speaks the mere contrary; crosses love

not him.

You may do it in an hour, sir.

How many is one thrice told?

You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.

Then I am sure you know how much the gross

sum of deuce-ace amounts to.

Which the base vulgar do call “three.”

Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here is

“three” studied ere you’ll thrice wink. And how

easy it is to put “years” to the word “three” and

study “three years” in two words, the dancing horse

will tell you.

To prove you a cipher.

Hercules, master.

Samson, master; he was a man of good carriage,

great carriage, for he carried the town gates on his

back like a porter, and he was in love.

A woman, master.

Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of

the four.

Of the sea-water green, sir.

As I have read, sir, and the best of them too.

It was so, sir, for she had a green wit.

Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked

under such colors.

My father’s wit and my mother’s tongue, assist

me.

If she be made of white and red,

Her faults will ne’er be known,

For blushing cheeks by faults are bred,

And fears by pale white shown.

Then if she fear, or be to blame,

By this you shall not know,

For still her cheeks possess the same

Which native she doth owe.

A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of

white and red.

The world was very guilty of such a ballad some

three ages since, but I think now ’tis not to be found;

or if it were, it would neither serve for the writing

nor the tune.

To be whipped—and yet a better love than

my master.

And that’s great marvel, loving a light

wench.

Forbear till this company be past.

Come, you transgressing slave, away.

No, sir, that were fast and loose. Thou shalt to

prison.

What shall some see?

Concolinel.

Master, will you win your love with a French

brawl?

No, my complete master, but to jig off a tune at the

tongue’s end, canary to it with your feet, humor it

with turning up your eyelids, sigh a note and sing a

note, sometimes through the throat as if you

swallowed love with singing love, sometimes

through the nose as if you snuffed up love by

smelling love; with your hat penthouse-like o’er the

shop of your eyes, with your arms crossed on your

thin-belly doublet like a rabbit on a spit; or your

hands in your pocket like a man after the old

painting; and keep not too long in one tune, but a

snip and away. These are compliments, these are

humors; these betray nice wenches that would be

betrayed without these, and make them men of

note—do you note me?—that most are affected

to these.

By my penny of observation.

“The hobby-horse is forgot.”

No, master. The hobby-horse is but a colt,

and your love perhaps a hackney.—But have you

forgot your love?

Negligent student, learn her by heart.

And out of heart, master. All those three I will

prove.

A man, if I live; and this “by, in, and without,”

upon the instant: “by” heart you love her, because

your heart cannot come by her; “in” heart you love

her, because your heart is in love with her; and

“out” of heart you love her, being out of heart that

you cannot enjoy her.

And three times as much more, and yet

nothing at all.

A message well sympathized—a horse to be ambassador

for an ass.

Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse,

for he is very slow-gaited. But I go.

As swift as lead, sir.

Minime, honest master, or rather, master, no.

You are too swift, sir, to say so.

Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?

Thump, then, and I flee.

A wonder, master!

Here’s a costard broken in a shin.

Do the wise think them other? Is not l’envoi a salve?

I will add the l’envoi. Say the moral again.

Until the goose came out of door

And stayed the odds by adding four.

Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with

my l’envoi.

The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee

Were still at odds, being but three.

A good l’envoi, ending in the goose. Would you

desire more?

By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.

Then called you for the l’envoi.

I will tell you sensibly.

Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.

They have been at a great feast

of languages and stolen the scraps.

Peace, the peal begins.

Yes, yes, he teaches boys the hornbook.—What is

a, b spelled backward, with the horn on his head?

Ba, most silly sheep, with a horn.—You hear his

learning.

The last of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or

the fifth, if I.

The sheep. The other two concludes it: o, u.

Offered by a child to an old man—which is

wit-old.

Horns.

Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip

about your infamy—unum cita—a gig of a cuckold’s

horn.

An excellent device. So, if any of the audience

hiss, you may cry “Well done, Hercules, now thou

crushest the snake.” That is the way to make an

offense gracious, though few have the grace to do it.

Thrice-worthy gentleman!

All hail, the richest beauties on the Earth!

A holy parcel of the fairest dames

That ever turned their—backs—to mortal views.

That ever turned their eyes to mortal views.

Out—

Out of your favors, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe

Not to behold—

Once to behold with your sun-beamèd eyes—

With your sun-beamèd eyes—

They do not mark me, and that brings me out.

Master, let me take you a buttonhole

lower. Do you not see Pompey is uncasing for the

combat? What mean you? You will lose your

reputation.

