


Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.

Consider who the King your father sends,

To whom he sends, and what’s his embassy.

Yourself, held precious in the world’s esteem,

To parley with the sole inheritor

Of all perfections that a man may owe,

Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight

Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.

Be now as prodigal of all dear grace

As nature was in making graces dear

When she did starve the general world besides

And prodigally gave them all to you.

Proud of employment, willingly I go.

Navarre had notice of your fair approach,

And he and his competitors in oath

Were all addressed to meet you, gentle lady,

Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learned:

He rather means to lodge you in the field,

Like one that comes here to besiege his court,

Than seek a dispensation for his oath

To let you enter his unpeopled house.

Here comes Navarre.

So please your Grace, the packet is not come

Where that and other specialties are bound.

Tomorrow you shall have a sight of them.

The heir of Alanson, Katherine her name.

A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.

She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.

Her mother’s, I have heard.

Good sir, be not offended. She is an heir of

Falconbridge.

Not unlike, sir, that may be.

Rosaline, by good hap.

To her will, sir, or so.

Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.

And every jest but a word.

I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.

And wherefore not ships?

No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.

So you grant pasture for me.

Belonging to whom?

If my observation, which very seldom lies,

By the heart’s still rhetoric, disclosèd wi’ th’ eyes,

Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.

With that which we lovers entitle “affected.”

Why, all his behaviors did make their retire

To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.

His heart like an agate with your print impressed,

Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed.

His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,

Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;

All senses to that sense did make their repair,

To feel only looking on fairest of fair.

Methought all his senses were locked in his eye,

As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy,

Who, tend’ring their own worth from where they were glassed,

Did point you to buy them along as you passed.

His face’s own margent did quote such amazes

That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.

I’ll give you Aquitaine, and all that is his,

An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.

But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclosed.

I only have made a mouth of his eye

By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.

Do you hear, my mad wenches?

What then, do you see?

You are too hard for me.

Do not curst wives hold that self sovereignty

Only for praise’ sake when they strive to be

Lords o’er their lords?

Here comes a member of the commonwealth.

I am bound to serve.

This letter is mistook; it importeth none here.

It is writ to Jaquenetta.

By heaven, that thou art fair is most

infallible, true that thou art beauteous, truth itself

that thou art lovely. More fairer than fair, beautiful

than beauteous, truer than truth itself, have commiseration

on thy heroical vassal. The magnanimous and

most illustrate King Cophetua set eye upon the pernicious

and indubitate beggar Zenelophon; and he it

was that might rightly say “Veni, vidi, vici,” which to

annothanize in the vulgar (O base and obscure vulgar!)

videlicet, “He came, see, and overcame”: He

came, one; see, two; overcame, three. Who came? The

King. Why did he come? To see. Why did he see? To

overcome. To whom came he? To the beggar. What

saw he? The beggar. Who overcame he? The beggar.

The conclusion is victory. On whose side? The

King’s. The captive is enriched. On whose side? The

beggar’s. The catastrophe is a nuptial. On whose side?

The King’s—no, on both in one, or one in both. I am

the King, for so stands the comparison; thou the

beggar, for so witnesseth thy lowliness. Shall I command

thy love? I may. Shall I enforce thy love? I could.

Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou

exchange for rags? Robes. For tittles? Titles. For thyself?

Me. Thus expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy

foot, my eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every

part.

Thine, in the dearest design of industry,

Don Adriano de Armado.

Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar

’Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey.

Submissive fall his princely feet before,

And he from forage will incline to play.

But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then?

Food for his rage, repasture for his den.

I am much deceived but I remember the style.

This Armado is a Spaniard that keeps here in court,

A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport

To the Prince and his bookmates.

Who is the shooter? Who is the shooter?

Ay, my continent of beauty.

My lady goes to kill horns, but if thou marry,

Hang me by the neck if horns that year miscarry.

Finely put on.

And who is your deer?

But she herself is hit lower. Have I hit her now?

So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a

woman when Queen Guinover of Britain was a little

wench, as touching the hit it.

An I cannot, cannot, cannot,

An I cannot, another can.

A mark! O, mark but that mark. “A mark,” says my lady.

Let the mark have a prick in ’t to mete at, if it may be.

An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.

I fear too much rubbing. Good night, my good owl.

O, I am stabbed with laughter. Where’s her Grace?

Prepare, madam, prepare.

Arm, wenches, arm. Encounters mounted are

Against your peace. Love doth approach, disguised,

Armèd in arguments. You’ll be surprised.

Muster your wits, stand in your own defense,

Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.

Under the cool shade of a sycamore,

I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour.

When, lo, to interrupt my purposed rest,

Toward that shade I might behold addressed

The King and his companions. Warily

I stole into a neighbor thicket by,

And overheard what you shall overhear:

That, by and by, disguised, they will be here.

Their herald is a pretty knavish page

That well by heart hath conned his embassage.

Action and accent did they teach him there:

“Thus must thou speak,” and “thus thy body bear.”

And ever and anon they made a doubt

Presence majestical would put him out;

“For,” quoth the King, “an angel shalt thou see;

Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.”

The boy replied “An angel is not evil.

I should have feared her had she been a devil.”

With that, all laughed and clapped him on the shoulder,

Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.

One rubbed his elbow thus, and fleered, and swore

A better speech was never spoke before.

Another with his finger and his thumb,

Cried “Via! We will do ’t, come what will come.”

The third he capered and cried “All goes well!”

The fourth turned on the toe, and down he fell.

With that, they all did tumble on the ground

With such a zealous laughter so profound

That in this spleen ridiculous appears,

To check their folly, passion’s solemn tears.

They do, they do; and are appareled thus,

Like Muscovites, or Russians, as I guess.

Their purpose is to parley, to court, and dance,

And every one his love-feat will advance

Unto his several mistress—which they’ll know

By favors several which they did bestow.

Why, that contempt will kill the speaker’s heart,

And quite divorce his memory from his part.

The trumpet sounds. Be masked; the maskers come.

Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.

True; out indeed.

They will not answer to that epithet.

You were best call it “daughter-beamèd eyes.”

What would you with the Princess?

Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

She says you have it, and you may be gone.

They say that they have measured many a mile

To tread a measure with you on this grass.

If to come hither you have measured miles,

And many miles, the Princess bids you tell

How many inches doth fill up one mile.

She hears herself.

The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen

As is the razor’s edge invisible,

Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen;

Above the sense of sense, so sensible

Seemeth their conference. Their conceits have wings

Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.

Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puffed out.

Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear.

Immediately they will again be here

In their own shapes, for it can never be

They will digest this harsh indignity.

They will, they will, God knows,

And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows.

Therefore change favors, and when they repair,

Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.

Fair ladies masked are roses in their bud.

Dismasked, their damask sweet commixture shown,

Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.

Ladies, withdraw. The gallants are at hand.

Gone to her tent. Please it your Majesty

Command me any service to her thither?

I will, and so will she, I know, my lord.

Full merrily

Hath this brave manage, this career been run.

With leopard’s head on knee.

Your nose says no, you are not, for it stands too right.

Most true; ’tis right. You were so, Alisander.

To make Judas hang himself.

A cittern-head.

The pommel of Caesar’s falchion.

Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.—

And so adieu, sweet Jude. Nay, why dost thou stay?

A light for Monsieur Judas! It grows dark; he may stumble.

But is this Hector?

No, he is best endued in the small.

Loves her by the foot.

Renowned Pompey!

True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want

of linen; since when, I’ll be sworn, he wore none

but a dishclout of Jaquenetta’s, and that he wears

next his heart for a favor.

