


Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit

grows melancholy?

Why, sadness is one and the selfsame thing,

dear imp.

How canst thou part sadness and melancholy,

my tender juvenal?

Why “tough signior”? Why “tough signior”?

I spoke it “tender juvenal” as a congruent

epitheton appertaining to thy young days, which

we may nominate “tender.”

Pretty and apt.

Thou pretty because little.

And therefore apt, because quick.

In thy condign praise.

What, that an eel is ingenious?

I do say thou art quick in answers. Thou

heat’st my blood.

I love not to be crossed.

I have promised to study three years with the

Duke.

Impossible.

I am ill at reckoning. It fitteth the spirit of a

tapster.

I confess both. They are both the varnish of a

complete man.

It doth amount to one more than two.

True.

A most fine figure.

I will hereupon confess I am in love; and as it

is base for a soldier to love, so am I in love with a

base wench. If drawing my sword against the

humor of affection would deliver me from the

reprobate thought of it, I would take desire prisoner

and ransom him to any French courtier for a

new-devised curtsy. I think scorn to sigh; methinks

I should outswear Cupid. Comfort me, boy. What

great men have been in love?

Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear

boy, name more; and, sweet my child, let them be

men of good repute and carriage.

O, well-knit Samson, strong-jointed Samson;

I do excel thee in my rapier as much as thou didst

me in carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was

Samson’s love, my dear Mote?

Of what complexion?

Tell me precisely of what complexion.

Is that one of the four complexions?

Green indeed is the color of lovers. But to

have a love of that color, methinks Samson had

small reason for it. He surely affected her for her

wit.

My love is most immaculate white and red.

Define, define, well-educated infant.

Sweet invocation of a child, most pretty and

pathetical.

Is there not a ballad, boy, of The King and

the Beggar?

I will have that subject newly writ o’er, that I

may example my digression by some mighty precedent.

Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in

the park with the rational hind Costard. She deserves

well.

Sing, boy. My spirit grows heavy in love.

I say sing.

I do betray myself with blushing.—

Maid.

I will visit thee at the lodge.

I know where it is situate.

I will tell thee wonders.

I love thee.

And so, farewell.

Villain, thou shalt fast for thy

offenses ere thou be pardoned.

Thou shalt be heavily punished.

Take away this villain. Shut him up.

I do affect the very ground (which is base)

where her shoe (which is baser) guided by her foot

(which is basest) doth tread. I shall be forsworn

(which is a great argument of falsehood) if I love.

And how can that be true love which is falsely

attempted? Love is a familiar; love is a devil. There is

no evil angel but love, yet was Samson so tempted,

and he had an excellent strength; yet was Solomon

so seduced, and he had a very good wit. Cupid’s

butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules’ club, and therefore

too much odds for a Spaniard’s rapier. The first

and second cause will not serve my turn; the

passado he respects not, the duello he regards not.

His disgrace is to be called “boy,” but his glory is to

subdue men. Adieu, valor; rust, rapier; be still,

drum, for your manager is in love. Yea, he loveth.

Assist me, some extemporal god of rhyme, for I am

sure I shall turn sonnet. Devise wit, write pen, for I

am for whole volumes in folio.

Warble, child, make passionate my sense of

hearing.

Sweet air. Go, tenderness of years.

Take this key, give enlargement to the

swain, bring him festinately hither. I must employ

him in a letter to my love.

How meanest thou? Brawling in French?

How hast thou purchased this experience?

But O— but O—.

Call’st thou my love “hobby-horse”?

Almost I had.

By heart and in heart, boy.

What wilt thou prove?

I am all these three.

Fetch hither the swain. He must carry me a

letter.

Ha? Ha? What sayest thou?

The way is but short. Away!

Thy meaning, pretty ingenious?

Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?

I say lead is slow.

Sweet smoke of rhetoric!

He reputes me a cannon, and the bullet, that’s he.—

I shoot thee at the swain.

A most acute juvenal, voluble and free of grace.

By thy favor, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face.

Most rude melancholy, valor gives thee place.

My herald is returned.

Some enigma, some riddle. Come, thy l’envoi begin.

By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly

thought, my spleen. The heaving of my lungs

provokes me to ridiculous smiling. O pardon me,

my stars! Doth the inconsiderate take salve for

l’envoi, and the word l’envoi for a salve?

No, page, it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain

Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.

I will example it:

The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee

Were still at odds, being but three.

There’s the moral. Now the l’envoi.

The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee

Were still at odds, being but three.

Until the goose came out of door,

Staying the odds by adding four.

Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?

But tell me, how was there a costard broken

in a shin?

We will talk no more of this matter.

Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.

By my sweet soul, I mean, setting thee at

liberty, enfreedoming thy person. Thou wert immured,

restrained, captivated, bound.

I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance,

and, in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but

this: bear this significant to the country maid

Jaquenetta. There is remuneration

for the best ward of

mine honor is rewarding my dependents.—Mote,

follow.

Chirrah.

Men of peace, well encountered.

Monsieur, are you not

lettered?

Now by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum,

a sweet touch, a quick venue of wit! Snip, snap,

quick and home. It rejoiceth my intellect. True

wit.

Arts-man, preambulate. We will be singuled

from the barbarous. Do you not educate youth at

the charge-house on the top of the mountain?

At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.

Sir, it is the King’s most sweet pleasure and

affection to congratulate the Princess at her pavilion

in the posteriors of this day, which the rude

multitude call the afternoon.

Sir, the King is a noble gentleman, and my

familiar, I do assure you, very good friend. For

what is inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech

thee, remember thy courtesy; I beseech thee apparel

thy head. And among other important and most

serious designs, and of great import indeed, too—

but let that pass; for I must tell thee, it will please his

Grace, by the world, sometimes to lean upon my

poor shoulder and with his royal finger thus dally

with my excrement, with my mustachio—but,

sweetheart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no

fable! Some certain special honors it pleaseth his

Greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of

travel, that hath seen the world—but let that pass.

The very all of all is—but sweetheart, I do implore

secrecy—that the King would have me present the

Princess, sweet chuck, with some delightful ostentation,

or show, or pageant, or antic, or firework.

Now, understanding that the curate and your sweet

self are good at such eruptions and sudden breaking

out of mirth, as it were, I have acquainted you

withal to the end to crave your assistance.

Pardon, sir—error. He is not quantity

enough for that Worthy’s thumb; he is not so big as

the end of his club!

For the rest of the Worthies?

Shall I tell you a thing?

We will have, if this fadge not, an antic. I

beseech you, follow.

Anointed, I implore so much expense

of thy royal sweet breath as will utter a brace

of words.

That is all one, my fair sweet honey

monarch, for, I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding

fantastical, too, too vain, too, too vain. But

we will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la guerra.—I

wish you the peace of mind, most royal

couplement!

The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,

Gave Hector a gift—

Peace!

The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,

Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion,

A man so breathed, that certain he would fight, yea,

From morn till night, out of his pavilion.

I am that flower—

Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.

The sweet warman is dead and rotten. Sweet

chucks, beat not the bones of the buried. When he

breathed, he was a man. But I will forward with my

device. Sweet royalty, bestow on me

the sense of hearing.

I do adore thy sweet Grace’s slipper.

This Hector far surmounted Hannibal.

The party is gone—

What meanest thou?

Dost thou infamonize me among potentates?

Thou shalt die!

By the North Pole, I do challenge

thee!

Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me. I will

not combat in my shirt.

Sweet bloods, I both may and will.

The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt. I go

woolward for penance.

For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I

have seen the day of wrong through the little hole

of discretion, and I will right myself like a soldier.

Sweet Majesty, vouchsafe me—

I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I

am a votary; I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the

plow for her sweet love three year. But, most

esteemed Greatness, will you hear the dialogue that

the two learned men have compiled in praise of the

owl and the cuckoo? It should have followed in the

end of our show.

Holla! Approach.

This side is Hiems, Winter; this Ver, the Spring; the

one maintained by the owl, th’ other by the cuckoo.

Ver, begin.

The words of Mercury are harsh after the

songs of Apollo. You that way; we this way.

