


Dear sir, forbear.

How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither,

Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.

Nor I, assure thee, Regan.—

Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father

A childlike office.

Is he pursued?

If he be taken, he shall never more

Be feared of doing harm. Make your own purpose,

How in my strength you please.—For you, Edmund,

Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant

So much commend itself, you shall be ours.

Natures of such deep trust we shall much need.

You we first seize on.

You know not why we came to visit you—

Keep peace, upon your lives! He dies that

strikes again. What is the matter?

What is your difference? Speak.

Thou art a strange fellow. A tailor make a

man?

Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?

Peace, sirrah!

You beastly knave, know you no reverence?

Why art thou angry?

What, art thou mad, old fellow?

Why dost thou call him “knave”? What is his fault?

No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.

This is some fellow

Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect

A saucy roughness and constrains the garb

Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he.

An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!

An they will take it, so; if not, he’s plain.

These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness

Harbor more craft and more corrupter ends

Than twenty silly-ducking observants

That stretch their duties nicely.

What mean’st by this?

What was th’ offense you gave him?

Fetch forth the stocks.—

You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,

We’ll teach you.

Fetch forth the stocks.—As I have life and honor,

There shall he sit till noon.

This is a fellow of the selfsame color

Our sister speaks of.—Come, bring away the stocks.

I’ll answer that.

Come, my good lord, away.

Hail to your Grace.

Fie, sir, fie!

What trumpet’s that?

What means your Grace?

I set him there, sir, but his own disorders

Deserved much less advancement.

Let us withdraw. ’Twill be a storm.

Followed the old man forth.    He is returned.

Whither is he going?

’Tis best to give him way. He leads himself.

Shut up your doors, my lord. ’Tis a wild night.

My Regan counsels well. Come out o’ th’ storm.

I will have my revenge ere I depart his

house.

I now perceive it was not altogether your

brother’s evil disposition made him seek his death,

but a provoking merit set awork by a reprovable

badness in himself.

Go with me to the Duchess.

True or false, it hath made thee Earl of

Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he

may be ready for our apprehension.

I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt

find a dearer father in my love.

Post speedily to my lord your

husband. Show him this letter.

The army of France is landed.—Seek out

the traitor Gloucester.

Leave him to my displeasure.—Edmund,

keep you our sister company. The revenges we are

bound to take upon your traitorous father are not

fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke, where you

are going, to a most festinate preparation; we are

bound to the like. Our posts shall be swift and

intelligent betwixt us.—Farewell, dear sister.—

Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.

How now? Where’s the King?

Get horses for your mistress.

Edmund, farewell. Go seek the traitor Gloucester.

Pinion him like a thief; bring him before us.

Though well we may not pass upon his life

Without the form of justice, yet our power

Shall do a court’sy to our wrath, which men

May blame but not control.    Who’s there? The traitor?

Bind fast his corky arms.

Bind him, I say.

To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find—

Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?

And what confederacy have you with the traitors

Late footed in the kingdom?

Cunning.

Where hast thou sent the King?

Wherefore to Dover? Let him answer that.

See ’t shalt thou never.—Fellows, hold the chair.—

Upon these eyes of thine I’ll set my foot.

If you see vengeance—

My villain?

Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!

Where is thy luster now?

I have received a hurt. Follow me, lady.—

Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave

Upon the dunghill.—Regan, I bleed apace.

Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.

