


What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.

Then poor Cordelia!

And yet not so, since I am sure my love’s

More ponderous than my tongue.

Nothing, my lord.

Nothing.

Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave

My heart into my mouth. I love your Majesty

According to my bond, no more nor less.

Good my lord,

You have begot me, bred me, loved me.

I return those duties back as are right fit:

Obey you, love you, and most honor you.

Why have my sisters husbands if they say

They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,

That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry

Half my love with him, half my care and duty.

Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,

To love my father all.

Ay, my good lord.

So young, my lord, and true.

I yet beseech your Majesty—

If for I want that glib and oily art

To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend

I’ll do ’t before I speak—that you make known

It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,

No unchaste action or dishonored step

That hath deprived me of your grace and favor,

But even for want of that for which I am richer:

A still-soliciting eye and such a tongue

That I am glad I have not, though not to have it

Hath lost me in your liking.

Peace be with Burgundy.

Since that respect and fortunes are his love,

I shall not be his wife.

The jewels of our father, with washed eyes

Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are,

And like a sister am most loath to call

Your faults as they are named. Love well our father.

To your professèd bosoms I commit him;

But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,

I would prefer him to a better place.

So farewell to you both.

Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides,

Who covers faults at last with shame derides.

Well may you prosper.

Alack, ’tis he! Why, he was met even now

As mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud,

Crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,

With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckooflowers,

Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow

In our sustaining corn. A century send forth.

Search every acre in the high-grown field

And bring him to our eye. What can man’s wisdom

In the restoring his bereavèd sense?

He that helps him take all my outward worth.

All blest secrets,

All you unpublished virtues of the earth,

Spring with my tears. Be aidant and remediate

In the good man’s distress. Seek, seek for him,

Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life

That wants the means to lead it.

’Tis known before. Our preparation stands

In expectation of them.—O dear father,

It is thy business that I go about.

Therefore great France

My mourning and importuned tears hath pitied.

No blown ambition doth our arms incite,

But love, dear love, and our aged father’s right.

Soon may I hear and see him.

O, thou good Kent, how shall I live and work

To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,

And every measure fail me.

Be better suited.

These weeds are memories of those worser hours.

I prithee put them off.

Then be ’t so, my good lord.—How does the King?

O, you kind gods,

Cure this great breach in his abusèd nature!

Th’ untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up,

Of this child-changèd father!

Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed

I’ th’ sway of your own will. Is he arrayed?

Very well.

O, my dear father, restoration hang

Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss

Repair those violent harms that my two sisters

Have in thy reverence made.

Had you not been their father, these white flakes

Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face

To be opposed against the jarring winds?

To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder,

In the most terrible and nimble stroke

Of quick cross-lightning? To watch, poor perdu,

With this thin helm? Mine enemy’s dog,

Though he had bit me, should have stood that night

Against my fire. And wast thou fain, poor father,

To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn

In short and musty straw? Alack, alack,

’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once

Had not concluded all.—He wakes. Speak to him.

How does my royal lord? How fares your Majesty?

Sir, do you know me?

Still, still, far wide.

O, look upon me, sir,

And hold your hand in benediction o’er me.

No, sir, you must not kneel.

And so I am; I am.

No cause, no cause.

Will ’t please your Highness walk?

We are not the first

Who with best meaning have incurred the worst.

For thee, oppressèd king, I am cast down.

Myself could else outfrown false Fortune’s frown.

Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?

