


No, my lord.

My services to your Lordship.

Sir, I shall study deserving.

Thou, Nature, art my goddess. To thy law

My services are bound. Wherefore should I

Stand in the plague of custom, and permit

The curiosity of nations to deprive me

For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines

Lag of a brother? why “bastard”? Wherefore “base,”

When my dimensions are as well compact,

My mind as generous and my shape as true

As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us

With “base,” with “baseness,” “bastardy,” “base,” “base,”

Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take

More composition and fierce quality

Than doth within a dull, stale, tired bed

Go to th’ creating a whole tribe of fops

Got ’tween asleep and wake? Well then,

Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.

Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmund

As to th’ legitimate. Fine word, “legitimate.”

Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed

And my invention thrive, Edmund the base

Shall top th’ legitimate. I grow, I prosper.

Now, gods, stand up for bastards!

So please your Lordship, none.

I know no news, my lord.

Nothing, my lord.

I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter

from my brother that I have not all o’erread; and

for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for

your o’erlooking.

I shall offend either to detain or give it. The

contents, as in part I understand them, are to

blame.

I hope, for my brother’s justification, he

wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.

It was not brought me, my lord; there’s the

cunning of it. I found it thrown in at the casement

of my closet.

If the matter were good, my lord, I durst

swear it were his; but in respect of that, I would

fain think it were not.

It is his hand, my lord, but I hope his heart is

not in the contents.

Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft

maintain it to be fit that, sons at perfect age and

fathers declined, the father should be as ward to the

son, and the son manage his revenue.

I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please

you to suspend your indignation against my brother

till you can derive from him better testimony of his

intent, you should run a certain course; where, if

you violently proceed against him, mistaking his

purpose, it would make a great gap in your own

honor and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience.

I dare pawn down my life for him that he hath

writ this to feel my affection to your Honor, and to

no other pretense of danger.

If your Honor judge it meet, I will place you

where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an

auricular assurance have your satisfaction, and that

without any further delay than this very evening.

Nor is not, sure.

I will seek him, sir, presently, convey the

business as I shall find means, and acquaint you

withal.

This is the excellent foppery of the world, that

when we are sick in fortune (often the surfeits of

our own behavior) we make guilty of our disasters

the sun, the moon, and stars, as if we were villains

on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion; knaves,

thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance;

drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced

obedience of planetary influence; and all that we

are evil in, by a divine thrusting on. An admirable

evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish

disposition on the charge of a star! My father

compounded with my mother under the Dragon’s

tail, and my nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it

follows I am rough and lecherous. Fut, I should

have been that I am, had the maidenliest star in the

firmament twinkled on my bastardizing. Edgar—

and pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old

comedy. My cue is villainous melancholy, with a

sigh like Tom o’ Bedlam.—O, these eclipses do

portend these divisions. Fa, sol, la, mi.

I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read

this other day, what should follow these eclipses.

I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed

unhappily, as of unnaturalness between the

child and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions of

ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and

maledictions against king and nobles, needless diffidences,

banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts,

nuptial breaches, and I know not what.

Come, come, when saw you my father last?

Spake you with him?

Parted you in good terms? Found you no

displeasure in him by word nor countenance?

Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended

him, and at my entreaty forbear his presence

until some little time hath qualified the heat

of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in

him that with the mischief of your person it would

scarcely allay.

That’s my fear. I pray you have a continent

forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower;

and, as I say, retire with me to my lodging, from

whence I will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak.

Pray you go. There’s my key. If you do stir abroad,

go armed.

Brother, I advise you to the best. I am no

honest man if there be any good meaning toward

you. I have told you what I have seen and heard, but

faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it. Pray

you, away.

I do serve you in this business.

A credulous father and a brother noble,

Whose nature is so far from doing harms

That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty

My practices ride easy. I see the business.

Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit.

All with me’s meet that I can fashion fit.

Save thee, Curan.

How comes that?

Not I. Pray you, what are they?

Not a word.

The Duke be here tonight? The better, best.

This weaves itself perforce into my business.

My father hath set guard to take my brother,

And I have one thing of a queasy question

Which I must act. Briefness and fortune work!—

Brother, a word. Descend. Brother, I say!

My father watches. O sir, fly this place!

Intelligence is given where you are hid.

You have now the good advantage of the night.

Have you not spoken ’gainst the Duke of Cornwall?

He’s coming hither, now, i’ th’ night, i’ th’ haste,

And Regan with him. Have you nothing said

Upon his party ’gainst the Duke of Albany?

Advise yourself.

I hear my father coming. Pardon me.

In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.

Draw. Seem to defend yourself. Now, quit you well.

Yield! Come before my father! Light, hoa, here!

Fly, brother.—Torches, torches! —So, farewell.

Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion

Of my more fierce endeavor. I have seen drunkards

Do more than this in sport. Father, father!

Stop, stop! No help?

Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,

Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon

To stand auspicious mistress.

Look, sir, I bleed.

Fled this way, sir, when by no means he could—

Persuade me to the murder of your Lordship,

But that I told him the revenging gods

’Gainst parricides did all the thunder bend,

Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond

The child was bound to th’ father—sir, in fine,

Seeing how loathly opposite I stood

To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion

With his preparèd sword he charges home

My unprovided body, lanced mine arm;

And when he saw my best alarumed spirits,

Bold in the quarrel’s right, roused to th’ encounter,

Or whether ghasted by the noise I made,

Full suddenly he fled.

When I dissuaded him from his intent

And found him pight to do it, with curst speech

I threatened to discover him. He replied

“Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think

If I would stand against thee, would the reposal

Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee

Make thy words faithed? No. What I should deny—

As this I would, though thou didst produce

My very character—I’d turn it all

To thy suggestion, plot, and damnèd practice.

And thou must make a dullard of the world

If they not thought the profits of my death

Were very pregnant and potential spurs

To make thee seek it.”

Yes, madam, he was of that consort.

It was my duty, sir.

I shall serve you, sir,

Truly, however else.

How now, what’s the matter? Part!

Most savage and unnatural.

This courtesy forbid thee shall the Duke

Instantly know, and of that letter too.

This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me

That which my father loses—no less than all.

The younger rises when the old doth fall.

How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature

thus gives way to loyalty, something fears me to

think of.

How malicious is my fortune that I must

repent to be just! This is the letter he spoke of,

which approves him an intelligent party to the

advantages of France. O heavens, that this treason

were not, or not I the detector.

If the matter of this paper be certain, you

have mighty business in hand.

If I find him comforting the King, it

will stuff his suspicion more fully.—I will persevere

in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore

between that and my blood.

Yours in the ranks of death.

Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,

Or whether since he is advised by aught

To change the course. He’s full of alteration

And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.

’Tis to be doubted, madam.

In honored love.

That thought abuses you.

No, by mine honor, madam.

Fear me not. She and the Duke, her husband.

Sir, you speak nobly.

I shall attend you presently at your tent.

The enemy’s in view. Draw up your powers.

Here is the guess of their true strength and forces

By diligent discovery. But your haste

Is now urged on you.

To both these sisters have I sworn my love,

Each jealous of the other as the stung

Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?

Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enjoyed

If both remain alive. To take the widow

Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril,

And hardly shall I carry out my side,

Her husband being alive. Now, then, we’ll use

His countenance for the battle, which, being done,

Let her who would be rid of him devise

His speedy taking off. As for the mercy

Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,

The battle done and they within our power,

Shall never see his pardon, for my state

Stands on me to defend, not to debate.

Some officers take them away. Good guard

Until their greater pleasures first be known

That are to censure them.

Take them away.

Come hither, captain. Hark.

Take thou this note. Go follow them to prison.

One step I have advanced thee. If thou dost

As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way

To noble fortunes. Know thou this: that men

Are as the time is; to be tender-minded

Does not become a sword. Thy great employment

Will not bear question. Either say thou ’lt do ’t,

Or thrive by other means.

About it, and write “happy” when th’ hast done.

Mark, I say, instantly, and carry it so

As I have set it down.

Sir, I thought it fit

To send the old and miserable king

To some retention and appointed guard,

Whose age had charms in it, whose title more,

To pluck the common bosom on his side

And turn our impressed lances in our eyes,

Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen,

My reason all the same, and they are ready

Tomorrow, or at further space, t’ appear

Where you shall hold your session. At this time

We sweat and bleed. The friend hath lost his friend,

And the best quarrels in the heat are cursed

By those that feel their sharpness.

The question of Cordelia and her father

Requires a fitter place.

Nor in thine, lord.

There’s my exchange. What in the world he is

That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.

Call by the trumpet. He that dares approach,

On him, on you, who not, I will maintain

My truth and honor firmly.

A herald, ho, a herald!

Himself. What sayest thou to him?

In wisdom I should ask thy name,

But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,

And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,

What safe and nicely I might well delay

By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.

Back do I toss these treasons to thy head,

With the hell-hated lie o’erwhelm thy heart,

Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,

This sword of mine shall give them instant way,

Where they shall rest forever. Trumpets, speak!

What you have charged me with, that have I done,

And more, much more. The time will bring it out.

’Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou

That hast this fortune on me? If thou ’rt noble,

I do forgive thee.

Th’ hast spoken right. ’Tis true.

The wheel is come full circle; I am here.

This speech of yours hath moved me,

And shall perchance do good. But speak you on.

You look as you had something more to say.

I was contracted to them both. All three

Now marry in an instant.

Yet Edmund was beloved.

The one the other poisoned for my sake,

And after slew herself.

I pant for life. Some good I mean to do

Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send—

Be brief in it—to th’ castle, for my writ

Is on the life of Lear, and on Cordelia.

Nay, send in time.

Well thought on. Take my sword. Give it the Captain.

He hath commission from thy wife and me

To hang Cordelia in the prison, and

To lay the blame upon her own despair,

That she fordid herself.

