


Sir, I love you more than word can wield the matter,

Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty,

Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,

No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honor;

As much as child e’er loved, or father found;

A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.

Beyond all manner of so much I love you.

Let your study

Be to content your lord, who hath received you

At Fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted

And well are worth the want that you have wanted.

Sister, it is not little I have to say of what

most nearly appertains to us both. I think our

father will hence tonight.

You see how full of changes his age is; the

observation we have made of it hath not been

little. He always loved our sister most, and with

what poor judgment he hath now cast her off

appears too grossly.

The best and soundest of his time hath been

but rash. Then must we look from his age to

receive not alone the imperfections of long-engraffed

condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness

that infirm and choleric years bring with

them.

There is further compliment of leave-taking

between France and him. Pray you, let us sit

together. If our father carry authority with such

disposition as he bears, this last surrender of his will

but offend us.

We must do something, and i’ th’ heat.

Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding

of his Fool?

By day and night he wrongs me. Every hour

He flashes into one gross crime or other

That sets us all at odds. I’ll not endure it.

His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us

On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,

I will not speak with him. Say I am sick.

If you come slack of former services,

You shall do well. The fault of it I’ll answer.

Put on what weary negligence you please,

You and your fellows. I’d have it come to question.

If he distaste it, let him to my sister,

Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,

Not to be overruled. Idle old man

That still would manage those authorities

That he hath given away. Now, by my life,

Old fools are babes again and must be used

With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused.

Remember what I have said.

And let his knights have colder looks among you.

What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.

I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,

That I may speak. I’ll write straight to my sister

To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.

Not only, sir, this your all-licensed Fool,

But other of your insolent retinue

Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth

In rank and not-to-be-endurèd riots. Sir,

I had thought by making this well known unto you

To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,

By what yourself too late have spoke and done,

That you protect this course and put it on

By your allowance; which if you should, the fault

Would not ’scape censure, nor the redresses sleep

Which in the tender of a wholesome weal

Might in their working do you that offense,

Which else were shame, that then necessity

Will call discreet proceeding.

I would you would make use of your good wisdom,

Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away

These dispositions which of late transport you

From what you rightly are.

This admiration, sir, is much o’ th’ savor

Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you

To understand my purposes aright.

As you are old and reverend, should be wise.

Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires,

Men so disordered, so debauched and bold,

That this our court, infected with their manners,

Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust

Makes it more like a tavern or a brothel

Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak

For instant remedy. Be then desired,

By her that else will take the thing she begs,

A little to disquantity your train,

And the remainders that shall still depend

To be such men as may besort your age,

Which know themselves and you.

You strike my people, and your disordered rabble

Make servants of their betters.

Never afflict yourself to know more of it,

But let his disposition have that scope

As dotage gives it.

Do you mark that?

Pray you, content.—What, Oswald, ho!—

You, sir, more knave than Fool, after your master.

This man hath had good counsel. A hundred knights!

’Tis politic and safe to let him keep

At point a hundred knights! Yes, that on every dream,

Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,

He may enguard his dotage with their powers

And hold our lives in mercy.—Oswald, I say!

Safer than trust too far.

Let me still take away the harms I fear,

Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.

What he hath uttered I have writ my sister.

If she sustain him and his hundred knights

When I have showed th’ unfitness—   How now, Oswald?

What, have you writ that letter to my sister?

Take you some company and away to horse.

Inform her full of my particular fear,

And thereto add such reasons of your own

As may compact it more. Get you gone,

And hasten your return. No, no, my lord,

This milky gentleness and course of yours,

Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,

You are much more at task for want of wisdom

Than praised for harmful mildness.

Nay, then—

Why not by th’ hand, sir? How have I offended?

All’s not offense that indiscretion finds

And dotage terms so.

At your choice, sir.

Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance

From those that she calls servants, or from mine?

Hear me, my lord.

What need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,

To follow in a house where twice so many

Have a command to tend you?

’Tis his own blame hath put himself from rest,

And must needs taste his folly.

So am I purposed. Where is my lord of Gloucester?

My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.

Pluck out his eyes.

Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.

Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband

Not met us on the way.    Now, where’s your master?

Then shall you go no further.

It is the cowish terror of his spirit,

That dares not undertake. He’ll not feel wrongs

Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way

May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother.

Hasten his musters and conduct his powers.

I must change names at home and give the distaff

Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant

Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear—

If you dare venture in your own behalf—

A mistress’s command. Wear this; spare speech.

Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak,

Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.

Conceive, and fare thee well.

My most dear Gloucester!

O, the difference of man and man!

To thee a woman’s services are due;

My fool usurps my body.

I have been worth the whistle.

No more. The text is foolish.

Milk-livered man,

That bear’st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;

Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning

Thine honor from thy suffering; that not know’st

Fools do those villains pity who are punished

Ere they have done their mischief. Where’s thy drum?

France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,

With plumèd helm thy state begins to threat,

Whilst thou, a moral fool, sits still and cries

“Alack, why does he so?”

O vain fool!

Marry, your manhood, mew—

One way I like this well.

But being widow and my Gloucester with her

May all the building in my fancy pluck

Upon my hateful life. Another way

The news is not so tart.—I’ll read, and answer.

I had rather lose the battle than that sister

Should loosen him and me.

Combine together ’gainst the enemy,

For these domestic and particular broils

Are not the question here.

No.

Oho, I know the riddle.—I will go.

Not so hot.

In his own grace he doth exalt himself

More than in your addition.

That were the most if he should husband you.

Holla, holla!

That eye that told you so looked but asquint.

Mean you to enjoy him?

An interlude!

If not, I’ll ne’er trust medicine.

This is practice, Gloucester.

By th’ law of war, thou wast not bound to answer

An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquished,

But cozened and beguiled.

Say if I do; the laws are mine, not thine.

Who can arraign me for ’t?

Ask me not what I know.

