


It did always seem so to us, but now in

the division of the kingdom, it appears not which

of the dukes he values most, for equalities are so

weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice

of either’s moiety.

His breeding, sir, hath been at my

charge. I have so often blushed to acknowledge

him that now I am brazed to ’t.

Sir, this young fellow’s mother could,

whereupon she grew round-wombed and had indeed,

sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband

for her bed. Do you smell a fault?

But I have a son, sir, by order of law,

some year elder than this, who yet is no dearer in

my account. Though this knave came something

saucily to the world before he was sent for, yet was

his mother fair, there was good sport at his making,

and the whoreson must be acknowledged.—Do you

know this noble gentleman, Edmund?

My lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter

as my honorable friend.

He hath been out nine years, and away he

shall again. The King is coming.

I shall, my lord.

Here’s France and Burgundy, my noble lord.

Kent banished thus? And France in choler parted?

And the King gone tonight, prescribed his power,

Confined to exhibition? All this done

Upon the gad?—Edmund, how now? What news?

Why so earnestly seek you to put up that

letter?

What paper were you reading?

No? What needed then that terrible dispatch

of it into your pocket? The quality of nothing

hath not such need to hide itself. Let’s see. Come, if

it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.

Give me the letter, sir.

Let’s see, let’s see.

This policy and reverence of age

makes the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps

our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish

them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the

oppression of aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath

power but as it is suffered. Come to me, that of this I

may speak more. If our father would sleep till I waked

him, you should enjoy half his revenue forever and

live the beloved of your brother. Edgar.

Hum? Conspiracy? “Sleep till I wake him, you

should enjoy half his revenue.” My son Edgar! Had

he a hand to write this? A heart and brain to breed it

in?—When came you to this? Who brought it?

You know the character to be your

brother’s?

It is his.

Has he never before sounded you in this

business?

O villain, villain! His very opinion in the

letter. Abhorred villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish

villain! Worse than brutish!—Go, sirrah, seek

him. I’ll apprehend him.—Abominable villain!—

Where is he?

Think you so?

He cannot be such a monster.

To his father, that so tenderly and entirely

loves him! Heaven and Earth! Edmund, seek him

out; wind me into him, I pray you. Frame the

business after your own wisdom. I would unstate

myself to be in a due resolution.

These late eclipses in the sun and moon

portend no good to us. Though the wisdom of

nature can reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds

itself scourged by the sequent effects. Love cools,

friendship falls off, brothers divide; in cities, mutinies;

in countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and

the bond cracked ’twixt son and father. This villain

of mine comes under the prediction: there’s son

against father. The King falls from bias of nature:

there’s father against child. We have seen the best of

our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and

all ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our

graves.—Find out this villain, Edmund. It shall

lose thee nothing. Do it carefully.—And the noble

and true-hearted Kent banished! His offense, honesty!

’Tis strange.

Now, Edmund, where’s the villain?

But where is he?

Where is the villain, Edmund?

Pursue him, ho! Go after. By no means what?

Let him fly far!

Not in this land shall he remain uncaught,

And found—dispatch. The noble duke my master,

My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight.

By his authority I will proclaim it

That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,

Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;

He that conceals him, death.

O strange and fastened villain!

Would he deny his letter, said he?

I never got him.

Hark, the Duke’s trumpets. I know not why he comes.

All ports I’ll bar. The villain shall not ’scape.

The Duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture

I will send far and near, that all the kingdom

May have due note of him. And of my land,

Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means

To make thee capable.

O madam, my old heart is cracked; it’s cracked.

O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!

I know not, madam. ’Tis too bad, too bad.

He did bewray his practice, and received

This hurt you see striving to apprehend him.

Ay, my good lord.

For him I thank your Grace.

I serve you, madam.

Your Graces are right welcome.

Weapons? Arms? What’s the matter here?

How fell you out? Say that.

Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.

His fault is much, and the good king his master

Will check him for ’t. Your purposed low correction

Is such as basest and contemned’st wretches

For pilf’rings and most common trespasses

Are punished with. The King must take it ill

That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,

Should have him thus restrained.

I am sorry for thee, friend. ’Tis the Duke’s pleasure,

Whose disposition all the world well knows

Will not be rubbed nor stopped. I’ll entreat for thee.

The Duke’s to blame in this. ’Twill be ill taken.

My dear lord,

You know the fiery quality of the Duke,

How unremovable and fixed he is

In his own course.

Well, my good lord, I have informed them so.

Ay, my good lord.

I would have all well betwixt you.

The King is in high rage.

He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.

Alack, the night comes on, and the high winds

Do sorely ruffle. For many miles about

There’s scarce a bush.

Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this

unnatural dealing. When I desired their leave that I

might pity him, they took from me the use of mine

own house, charged me on pain of perpetual

displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for

him, or any way sustain him.

Go to; say you nothing. There is division

between the dukes, and a worse matter than that. I

have received a letter this night; ’tis dangerous to

be spoken; I have locked the letter in my closet.

These injuries the King now bears will be revenged

home; there is part of a power already footed. We

must incline to the King. I will look him and privily

relieve him. Go you and maintain talk with the

Duke, that my charity be not of him perceived. If he

ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. If I die for it, as

no less is threatened me, the King my old master

must be relieved. There is strange things toward,

Edmund. Pray you, be careful.

What are you there? Your names?

What, hath your Grace no better company?

Our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile

That it doth hate what gets it.

Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer

T’ obey in all your daughters’ hard commands.

Though their injunction be to bar my doors

And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,

Yet have I ventured to come seek you out

And bring you where both fire and food is ready.

Canst thou blame him?

His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!

He said it would be thus, poor banished man.

Thou sayest the King grows mad; I’ll tell thee, friend,

I am almost mad myself. I had a son,

Now outlawed from my blood. He sought my life

But lately, very late. I loved him, friend,

No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,

The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night’s this!

—I do beseech your Grace—

In fellow, there, into th’ hovel. Keep thee warm.

Take him you on.

No words, no words. Hush.

Here is better than the open air. Take it

thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what

addition I can. I will not be long from you.

Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?

Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms.

I have o’erheard a plot of death upon him.

There is a litter ready; lay him in ’t,

And drive toward Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet

Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master.

If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,

With thine and all that offer to defend him,

Stand in assurèd loss. Take up, take up,

And follow me, that will to some provision

Give thee quick conduct.

Come, come away.

What means your Graces? Good my friends, consider

You are my guests; do me no foul play, friends.

Unmerciful lady as you are, I’m none.

By the kind gods, ’tis most ignobly done

To pluck me by the beard.

Naughty lady,

These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin

Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your host;

With robber’s hands my hospitable favors

You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?

I have a letter guessingly set down

Which came from one that’s of a neutral heart,

And not from one opposed.

To Dover.

I am tied to th’ stake, and I must stand the course.

Because I would not see thy cruel nails

Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister

In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.

The sea, with such a storm as his bare head

In hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up

And quenched the stellèd fires;

Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.

If wolves had at thy gate howled that stern time,

Thou shouldst have said “Good porter, turn the key.”

All cruels else subscribe. But I shall see

The wingèd vengeance overtake such children.

He that will think to live till he be old,

Give me some help!  O cruel! O you gods!

All dark and comfortless! Where’s my son Edmund?—

Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature

To quit this horrid act.

O my follies! Then Edgar was abused.

Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him.

Away, get thee away. Good friend, begone.

Thy comforts can do me no good at all;

Thee they may hurt.

I have no way and therefore want no eyes.

I stumbled when I saw. Full oft ’tis seen

Our means secure us, and our mere defects

Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,

The food of thy abusèd father’s wrath,

Might I but live to see thee in my touch,

I’d say I had eyes again.

Is it a beggar-man?

He has some reason, else he could not beg.

I’ th’ last night’s storm, I such a fellow saw,

Which made me think a man a worm. My son

Came then into my mind, and yet my mind

Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since.

As flies to wanton boys are we to th’ gods;

They kill us for their sport.

Is that the naked fellow?

Then, prithee, get thee away. If for my sake

Thou wilt o’ertake us hence a mile or twain

I’ th’ way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,

And bring some covering for this naked soul,

Which I’ll entreat to lead me.

’Tis the time’s plague when madmen lead the blind.

Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.

Above the rest, begone.

Sirrah, naked fellow—

Come hither, fellow.

Know’st thou the way to Dover?

Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens’ plagues

Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched

Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still:

Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,

That slaves your ordinance, that will not see

Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly.

So distribution should undo excess

And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?

There is a cliff, whose high and bending head

Looks fearfully in the confinèd deep.

Bring me but to the very brim of it,

And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear

With something rich about me. From that place

I shall no leading need.

When shall I come to th’ top of that same hill?

Methinks the ground is even.

No, truly.

So may it be indeed.

Methinks thy voice is altered and thou speak’st

In better phrase and matter than thou didst.

Methinks you’re better spoken.

Set me where you stand.

Let go my hand.

Here, friend, ’s another purse; in it a jewel

Well worth a poor man’s taking. Fairies and gods

Prosper it with thee. Go thou further off.

Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

With all my heart.

O you mighty gods!

This world I do renounce, and in your sights

Shake patiently my great affliction off.

If I could bear it longer, and not fall

To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,

My snuff and loathèd part of nature should

Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!—

Now, fellow, fare thee well.

Away, and let me die.

But have I fall’n or no?

Alack, I have no eyes.

Is wretchedness deprived that benefit

To end itself by death? ’Twas yet some comfort

When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage

And frustrate his proud will.

Too well, too well.

A poor unfortunate beggar.

I do remember now. Henceforth I’ll bear

Affliction till it do cry out itself

“Enough, enough!” and die. That thing you speak of,

I took it for a man. Often ’twould say

“The fiend, the fiend!” He led me to that place.

I know that voice.

The trick of that voice I do well remember.

Is ’t not the King?

O, let me kiss that hand!

O ruined piece of nature! This great world

Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?

Were all thy letters suns, I could not see.

What, with the case of eyes?

I see it feelingly.

Ay, sir.

Alack, alack the day!

You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;

Let not my worser spirit tempt me again

To die before you please.

Now, good sir, what are you?

Hearty thanks.

The bounty and the benison of heaven

To boot, and boot.

Now let thy friendly hand

Put strength enough to ’t.

What, is he dead?

The King is mad. How stiff is my vile sense

That I stand up and have ingenious feeling

Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract.

So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs,

And woes, by wrong imaginations, lose

The knowledge of themselves.

Grace go with you, sir.

No further, sir. A man may rot even here.

And that’s true too.

