


I thought the King had more affected the Duke

of Albany than Cornwall.

Is not this your son, my lord?

I cannot conceive you.

I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it

being so proper.

I must love you and sue to know you better.

Good my liege—

Royal Lear,

Whom I have ever honored as my king,

Loved as my father, as my master followed,

As my great patron thought on in my prayers—

Let it fall rather, though the fork invade

The region of my heart. Be Kent unmannerly

When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?

Think’st thou that duty shall have dread to speak

When power to flattery bows? To plainness honor’s bound

When majesty falls to folly. Reserve thy state,

And in thy best consideration check

This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment,

Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,

Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sounds

Reverb no hollowness.

My life I never held but as a pawn

To wage against thine enemies, nor fear to lose it,

Thy safety being motive.

See better, Lear, and let me still remain

The true blank of thine eye.

Now, by Apollo, king,

Thou swear’st thy gods in vain.

Kill thy physician, and thy fee bestow

Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,

Or whilst I can vent clamor from my throat,

I’ll tell thee thou dost evil.

Fare thee well, king. Sith thus thou wilt appear,

Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.

The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,

That justly think’st and hast most rightly said.

And your large speeches may your deeds approve,

That good effects may spring from words of love.—

Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu.

He’ll shape his old course in a country new.

If but as well I other accents borrow

That can my speech diffuse, my good intent

May carry through itself to that full issue

For which I razed my likeness. Now, banished Kent,

If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned,

So may it come thy master, whom thou lov’st,

Shall find thee full of labors.

A man, sir.

I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve

him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that

is honest, to converse with him that is wise and says

little, to fear judgment, to fight when I cannot

choose, and to eat no fish.

A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the

King.

Service.

You.

No, sir, but you have that in your countenance

which I would fain call master.

Authority.

I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a

curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message

bluntly. That which ordinary men are fit for I

am qualified in, and the best of me is diligence.

Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing,

nor so old to dote on her for anything. I have years

on my back forty-eight.

Nor tripped neither, you base

football player?

Come, sir, arise. Away. I’ll teach you

differences. Away, away. If you will measure your

lubber’s length again, tarry. But away. Go to. Have

you wisdom? So.

This is nothing, Fool.

This is not altogether fool, my lord.

I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered

your letter.

Ay.

I’ th’ mire.

I love thee not.

If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make

thee care for me.

Fellow, I know thee.

A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats; a

base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound,

filthy worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered,

action-taking, whoreson, glass-gazing, superserviceable,

finical rogue; one-trunk-inheriting

slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of good

service, and art nothing but the composition of a

knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir

of a mongrel bitch; one whom I will beat into

clamorous whining if thou deny’st the least syllable

of thy addition.

What a brazen-faced varlet art thou to deny thou

knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up

thy heels and beat thee before the King?

Draw, you rogue, for though it be night,

yet the moon shines. I’ll make a sop o’ th’ moonshine

of you, you whoreson, cullionly barbermonger.

Draw!

Draw, you rascal! You come with letters against

the King and take Vanity the puppet’s part against

the royalty of her father. Draw, you rogue, or I’ll so

carbonado your shanks! Draw, you rascal! Come

your ways.

Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat

slave! Strike!

With you, goodman boy, if you please. Come, I’ll

flesh you. Come on, young master.

No marvel, you have so bestirred your valor.

You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a

tailor made thee.

A tailor, sir. A stonecutter or a painter could not

have made him so ill, though they had been but two

years o’ th’ trade.

Thou whoreson zed, thou unnecessary letter!

—My lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread

this unbolted villain into mortar and daub the wall

of a jakes with him.—Spare my gray beard, you

wagtail?

Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.

That such a slave as this should wear a sword,

Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,

Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain

Which are too intrinse t’ unloose; smooth every passion

That in the natures of their lords rebel—

Being oil to fire, snow to the colder moods—

Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks

With every gale and vary of their masters,

Knowing naught, like dogs, but following.—

A plague upon your epileptic visage!

Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?

Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,

I’d drive you cackling home to Camelot.

No contraries hold more antipathy

Than I and such a knave.

His countenance likes me not.

Sir, ’tis my occupation to be plain:

I have seen better faces in my time

Than stands on any shoulder that I see

Before me at this instant.

Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,

Under th’ allowance of your great aspect,

Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire

On flick’ring Phoebus’ front—

To go out of my dialect, which you discommend

so much. I know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that

beguiled you in a plain accent was a plain knave,

which for my part I will not be, though I should

win your displeasure to entreat me to ’t.

None of these rogues and cowards

But Ajax is their fool.

Sir, I am too old to learn.

Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King,

On whose employment I was sent to you.

You shall do small respect, show too bold malice

Against the grace and person of my master,

Stocking his messenger.

Why, madam, if I were your father’s dog,

You should not use me so.

Pray, do not, sir. I have watched and traveled hard.

Some time I shall sleep out; the rest I’ll whistle.

A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels.

Give you good morrow.

Good king, that must approve the common saw,

Thou out of heaven’s benediction com’st

To the warm sun.

Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,

That by thy comfortable beams I may

Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles

But misery. I know ’tis from Cordelia,

Who hath most fortunately been informed

Of my obscurèd course, and shall find time

From this enormous state, seeking to give

Losses their remedies. All weary and o’erwatched,

Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold

This shameful lodging.

Fortune, good night. Smile once more; turn thy wheel.

Hail to thee, noble master.

No, my lord.

It is both he and she,

Your son and daughter.

Yes.

I say yea.

By Juno, I swear ay.

My lord, when at their home

I did commend your Highness’ letters to them,

Ere I was risen from the place that showed

My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,

Stewed in his haste, half breathless, panting forth

From Goneril his mistress salutations;

Delivered letters, spite of intermission,

Which presently they read; on whose contents

They summoned up their meiny, straight took horse,

Commanded me to follow and attend

The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks;

And meeting here the other messenger,

Whose welcome, I perceived, had poisoned mine,

Being the very fellow which of late

Displayed so saucily against your Highness,

Having more man than wit about me, drew.

He raised the house with loud and coward cries.

Your son and daughter found this trespass worth

The shame which here it suffers.

With the Earl, sir, here within.

None.

How chance the King comes with so small a number?

Why, Fool?

Where learned you this, Fool?

Who’s there, besides foul weather?

I know you. Where’s the King?

But who is with him?

Sir, I do know you

And dare upon the warrant of my note

Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,

Although as yet the face of it is covered

With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall,

Who have—as who have not, that their great stars

Throned and set high?—servants, who seem no less,

Which are to France the spies and speculations

Intelligent of our state. From France there comes a power

Into this scattered kingdom, who already,

Wise in our negligence, have secret feet

In some of our best ports and are at point

To show their open banner. Now to you:

If on my credit you dare build so far

To make your speed to Dover, you shall find

Some that will thank you, making just report

Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow

The King hath cause to plain: what hath been seen,

Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,

Or the hard rein which both of them hath borne

Against the old kind king, or something deeper,

Whereof perchance these are but furnishings.

I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,

And from some knowledge and assurance offer

This office to you.

No, do not.

For confirmation that I am much more

Than my outwall, open this purse and take

What it contains.  If you shall see Cordelia

(As fear not but you shall), show her this ring,

And she will tell you who that fellow is

That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!

I will go seek the King.

Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:

That when we have found the King—in which your pain

That way, I’ll this—he that first lights on him

Holla the other.

Who’s there?

Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night

Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies

Gallow the very wanderers of the dark

And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,

Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,

Such groans of roaring wind and rain I never

Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry

Th’ affliction nor the fear.

Alack, bareheaded?

Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel.

Some friendship will it lend you ’gainst the tempest.

Repose you there while I to this hard house—

More harder than the stones whereof ’tis raised,

Which even but now, demanding after you,

Denied me to come in—return and force

Their scanted courtesy.

Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.

The tyranny of the open night ’s too rough

For nature to endure.

Good my lord, enter here.

I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.

Good my lord, enter here.

Give me thy hand. Who’s there?

What art thou that dost grumble there i’ th’

straw? Come forth.

He hath no daughters, sir.

How fares your Grace?

Who’s there? What is ’t you seek?

Good my lord, take his offer; go into th’ house.

Importune him once more to go, my lord.

His wits begin t’ unsettle.

This way, my lord.

Good my lord, soothe him. Let him take the fellow.

Sirrah, come on: go along with us.

All the power of his wits have given way to his

impatience. The gods reward your kindness!

How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed.

Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?

O pity! Sir, where is the patience now

That you so oft have boasted to retain?

Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.

Here, sir, but trouble him not; his wits are gone.

Oppressèd nature sleeps.

This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews,

Which, if convenience will not allow,

Stand in hard cure. Come, help to bear thy master.

Thou must not stay behind.

Why the King of France is so suddenly gone

back know you no reason?

Who hath he left behind him general?

Did your letters pierce the Queen to any demonstration

of grief?

O, then it moved her.

Made she no verbal question?

It is the stars.

The stars above us govern our conditions,

Else one self mate and make could not beget

Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?

Was this before the King returned?

Well, sir, the poor distressèd Lear’s i’ th’ town,

Who sometime in his better tune remembers

What we are come about, and by no means

Will yield to see his daughter.

A sovereign shame so elbows him—his own unkindness,

That stripped her from his benediction, turned her

To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights

To his dog-hearted daughters—these things sting

His mind so venomously that burning shame

Detains him from Cordelia.

Of Albany’s and Cornwall’s powers you heard not?

Well, sir, I’ll bring you to our master Lear

And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause

Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.

When I am known aright, you shall not grieve

Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go

Along with me.

To be acknowledged, madam, is o’erpaid.

All my reports go with the modest truth,

Nor more, nor clipped, but so.

Pardon, dear madam.

Yet to be known shortens my made intent.

My boon I make it that you know me not

Till time and I think meet.

Kind and dear princess.

In your own kingdom, sir.

Most certain, sir.

As ’tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.

Report is changeable. ’Tis time to look about.

The powers of the kingdom approach apace.

My point and period will be throughly wrought,

Or well, or ill, as this day’s battle’s fought.

I am come

To bid my king and master aye goodnight.

Is he not here?

Alack, why thus?

Is this the promised end?

O, my good master—

If Fortune brag of two she loved and hated,

One of them we behold.

The same,

Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?

No, my good lord, I am the very man—

That from your first of difference and decay

Have followed your sad steps.

Nor no man else. All’s cheerless, dark, and deadly.

Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,

And desperately are dead.

Break, heart, I prithee, break!

Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass! He hates him

That would upon the rack of this tough world

Stretch him out longer.

The wonder is he hath endured so long.

He but usurped his life.

I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;

My master calls me. I must not say no.

