


What a haste looks through his eyes!

So should he look that seems to speak things strange.

Good morrow, noble sir.

Goes the King hence today?

The night has been unruly. Where we lay,

Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say,

Lamentings heard i’ th’ air, strange screams of death,

And prophesying, with accents terrible,

Of dire combustion and confused events

New hatched to th’ woeful time. The obscure bird

Clamored the livelong night. Some say the Earth

Was feverous and did shake.

My young remembrance cannot parallel

A fellow to it.

What’s the matter?

Mean you his Majesty?

Those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done ’t.

Their hands and faces were all badged with blood.

So were their daggers, which unwiped we found

Upon their pillows. They stared and were distracted.

No man’s life was to be trusted with them.

So all.

Well contented.

May ’t please your Highness sit.

Here is a place reserved, sir.

Here, my good lord. What is ’t that moves your Highness?

Good night, and better health

Attend his Majesty.

My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,

Which can interpret farther. Only I say

Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan

Was pitied of Macbeth; marry, he was dead.

And the right valiant Banquo walked too late,

Whom you may say, if ’t please you, Fleance killed,

For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.

Who cannot want the thought how monstrous

It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain

To kill their gracious father? Damnèd fact,

How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight

In pious rage the two delinquents tear

That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?

Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely, too,

For ’twould have angered any heart alive

To hear the men deny ’t. So that I say

He has borne all things well. And I do think

That had he Duncan’s sons under his key

(As, an ’t please heaven, he shall not) they should find

What ’twere to kill a father. So should Fleance.

But peace. For from broad words, and ’cause he failed

His presence at the tyrant’s feast, I hear

Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell

Where he bestows himself?

Sent he to Macduff?

And that well might

Advise him to a caution t’ hold what distance

His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel

Fly to the court of England and unfold

His message ere he come, that a swift blessing

May soon return to this our suffering country

Under a hand accursed.

What’s your Grace’s will?

No, my lord.

No, indeed, my lord.

’Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word

Macduff is fled to England.

Ay, my good lord.

For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file

Of all the gentry. There is Siward’s son

And many unrough youths that even now

Protest their first of manhood.

Or so much as it needs

To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.

Make we our march towards Birnam.

