


So foul and fair a day I have not seen.

Speak if you can. What are you?

Stay, you imperfect speakers. Tell me more.

By Sinel’s death I know I am Thane of Glamis.

But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives

A prosperous gentleman, and to be king

Stands not within the prospect of belief,

No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence

You owe this strange intelligence or why

Upon this blasted heath you stop our way

With such prophetic greeting. Speak, I charge you.

Into the air, and what seemed corporal melted,

As breath into the wind. Would they had stayed!

Your children shall be kings.

And Thane of Cawdor too. Went it not so?

The Thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me

In borrowed robes?

Glamis and Thane of Cawdor!

The greatest is behind. Thanks for your pains.

Do you not hope your children shall be kings,

When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me

Promised no less to them?

Two truths are told

As happy prologues to the swelling act

Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.

This supernatural soliciting

Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill,

Why hath it given me earnest of success

Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.

If good, why do I yield to that suggestion

Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair

And make my seated heart knock at my ribs

Against the use of nature? Present fears

Are less than horrible imaginings.

My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,

Shakes so my single state of man

That function is smothered in surmise,

And nothing is but what is not.

If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me

Without my stir.

Come what come may,

Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.

Give me your favor. My dull brain was wrought

With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains

Are registered where every day I turn

The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King.

Think upon what hath chanced, and at more time,

The interim having weighed it, let us speak

Our free hearts each to other.

Till then, enough.—Come, friends.

The service and the loyalty I owe

In doing it pays itself. Your Highness’ part

Is to receive our duties, and our duties

Are to your throne and state children and servants,

Which do but what they should by doing everything

Safe toward your love and honor.

The rest is labor which is not used for you.

I’ll be myself the harbinger and make joyful

The hearing of my wife with your approach.

So humbly take my leave.

The Prince of Cumberland! That is a step

On which I must fall down or else o’erleap,

For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;

Let not light see my black and deep desires.

The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be

Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.

My dearest love,

Duncan comes here tonight.

Tomorrow, as he purposes.

We will speak further.

If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well

It were done quickly. If th’ assassination

Could trammel up the consequence and catch

With his surcease success, that but this blow

Might be the be-all and the end-all here,

But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,

We’d jump the life to come. But in these cases

We still have judgment here, that we but teach

Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return

To plague th’ inventor. This even-handed justice

Commends th’ ingredience of our poisoned chalice

To our own lips. He’s here in double trust:

First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,

Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,

Who should against his murderer shut the door,

Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan

Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been

So clear in his great office, that his virtues

Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against

The deep damnation of his taking-off;

And pity, like a naked newborn babe

Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubin horsed

Upon the sightless couriers of the air,

Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,

That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur

To prick the sides of my intent, but only

Vaulting ambition, which o’erleaps itself

And falls on th’ other—

How now, what news?

Hath he asked for me?

We will proceed no further in this business.

He hath honored me of late, and I have bought

Golden opinions from all sorts of people,

Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,

Not cast aside so soon.

Prithee, peace.

I dare do all that may become a man.

Who dares do more is none.

If we should fail—

Bring forth men-children only,

For thy undaunted mettle should compose

Nothing but males. Will it not be received,

When we have marked with blood those sleepy two

Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,

That they have done ’t?

I am settled and bend up

Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.

Away, and mock the time with fairest show.

False face must hide what the false heart doth know.

A friend.

Being unprepared,

Our will became the servant to defect,

Which else should free have wrought.

I think not of them.

Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,

We would spend it in some words upon that business,

If you would grant the time.

If you shall cleave to my consent, when ’tis,

It shall make honor for you.

Good repose the while.

Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,

She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.

Is this a dagger which I see before me,

The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.

I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.

Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible

To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but

A dagger of the mind, a false creation

Proceeding from the heat-oppressèd brain?

I see thee yet, in form as palpable

As this which now I draw.

Thou marshal’st me the way that I was going,

And such an instrument I was to use.

Mine eyes are made the fools o’ th’ other senses

Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still,

And, on thy blade and dudgeon, gouts of blood,

Which was not so before. There’s no such thing.

It is the bloody business which informs

Thus to mine eyes. Now o’er the one-half world

Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse

The curtained sleep. Witchcraft celebrates

Pale Hecate’s off’rings, and withered murder,

Alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf,

Whose howl’s his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,

With Tarquin’s ravishing strides, towards his design

Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,

Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear

Thy very stones prate of my whereabouts

And take the present horror from the time,

Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives.

Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.

I go, and it is done. The bell invites me.

Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell

That summons thee to heaven or to hell.

Who’s there? what, ho!

I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?

When?

As I descended?

Hark!—Who lies i’ th’ second chamber?

This is a sorry sight.

There’s one did laugh in ’s sleep, and one cried “Murder!”

That they did wake each other. I stood and heard them.

But they did say their prayers and addressed them

Again to sleep.

One cried “God bless us” and “Amen” the other,

As they had seen me with these hangman’s hands,

List’ning their fear. I could not say “Amen”

When they did say “God bless us.”

But wherefore could not I pronounce “Amen”?

I had most need of blessing, and “Amen”

Stuck in my throat.

Methought I heard a voice cry “Sleep no more!

Macbeth does murder sleep”—the innocent sleep,

Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care,

The death of each day’s life, sore labor’s bath,

Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,

Chief nourisher in life’s feast.

Still it cried “Sleep no more!” to all the house.

“Glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore Cawdor

Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more.”

I’ll go no more.

I am afraid to think what I have done.

Look on ’t again I dare not.

Whence is that knocking?

How is ’t with me when every noise appalls me?

What hands are here! Ha, they pluck out mine eyes.

Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood

Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather

The multitudinous seas incarnadine,

Making the green one red.

To know my deed ’twere best not know myself.

Wake Duncan with thy knocking. I would thou couldst.

Good morrow, both.

Not yet.

I’ll bring you to him.

The labor we delight in physics pain.

This is the door.

He does. He did appoint so.

’Twas a rough night.

What’s the matter?

What is ’t you say? The life?

Had I but died an hour before this chance,

I had lived a blessèd time; for from this instant

There’s nothing serious in mortality.

All is but toys. Renown and grace is dead.

The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees

Is left this vault to brag of.

You are, and do not know ’t.

The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood

Is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.

O, yet I do repent me of my fury,

That I did kill them.

Who can be wise, amazed, temp’rate, and furious,

Loyal, and neutral, in a moment? No man.

Th’ expedition of my violent love

Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,

His silver skin laced with his golden blood,

And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature

For ruin’s wasteful entrance; there the murderers,

Steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers

Unmannerly breeched with gore. Who could refrain

That had a heart to love, and in that heart

Courage to make ’s love known?

So all.

Let’s briefly put on manly readiness

And meet i’ th’ hall together.

Here’s our chief guest.

Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,

And I’ll request your presence.

Ride you this afternoon?

We should have else desired your good advice

(Which still hath been both grave and prosperous)

In this day’s council, but we’ll take tomorrow.

Is ’t far you ride?

Fail not our feast.

We hear our bloody cousins are bestowed

In England and in Ireland, not confessing

Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers

With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,

When therewithal we shall have cause of state

Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse. Adieu,

Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?

I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,

And so I do commend you to their backs.

Farewell.

Let every man be master of his time

Till seven at night. To make society

The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself

Till suppertime alone. While then, God be with you.

Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men

Our pleasure?

Bring them before us. To be thus is nothing,

But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo

Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature

Reigns that which would be feared. ’Tis much he dares,

And to that dauntless temper of his mind

He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor

To act in safety. There is none but he

Whose being I do fear; and under him

My genius is rebuked, as it is said

Mark Antony’s was by Caesar. He chid the sisters

When first they put the name of king upon me

And bade them speak to him. Then, prophet-like,

They hailed him father to a line of kings.

Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown

And put a barren scepter in my grip,

Thence to be wrenched with an unlineal hand,

No son of mine succeeding. If ’t be so,

For Banquo’s issue have I filed my mind;

For them the gracious Duncan have I murdered,

Put rancors in the vessel of my peace

Only for them, and mine eternal jewel

Given to the common enemy of man

To make them kings, the seeds of Banquo kings.

Rather than so, come fate into the list,

And champion me to th’ utterance.—Who’s there?

Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.

Was it not yesterday we spoke together?

Well then, now

Have you considered of my speeches? Know

That it was he, in the times past, which held you

So under fortune, which you thought had been

Our innocent self. This I made good to you

In our last conference, passed in probation with you

How you were borne in hand, how crossed, the instruments,

Who wrought with them, and all things else that might

To half a soul and to a notion crazed

Say “Thus did Banquo.”

I did so, and went further, which is now

Our point of second meeting. Do you find

Your patience so predominant in your nature

That you can let this go? Are you so gospeled

To pray for this good man and for his issue,

Whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave

And beggared yours forever?

Ay, in the catalogue you go for men,

As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,

Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept

All by the name of dogs. The valued file

Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,

The housekeeper, the hunter, every one

According to the gift which bounteous nature

Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive

Particular addition, from the bill

That writes them all alike. And so of men.

Now, if you have a station in the file,

Not i’ th’ worst rank of manhood, say ’t,

And I will put that business in your bosoms

Whose execution takes your enemy off,

Grapples you to the heart and love of us,

Who wear our health but sickly in his life,

Which in his death were perfect.

Both of you

Know Banquo was your enemy.

So is he mine, and in such bloody distance

That every minute of his being thrusts

Against my near’st of life. And though I could

With barefaced power sweep him from my sight

And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,

For certain friends that are both his and mine,

Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall

Who I myself struck down. And thence it is

That I to your assistance do make love,

Masking the business from the common eye

For sundry weighty reasons.

Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most

I will advise you where to plant yourselves,

Acquaint you with the perfect spy o’ th’ time,

The moment on ’t, for ’t must be done tonight

And something from the palace; always thought

That I require a clearness. And with him

(To leave no rubs nor botches in the work)

Fleance, his son, that keeps him company,

Whose absence is no less material to me

Than is his father’s, must embrace the fate

Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart.

I’ll come to you anon.

I’ll call upon you straight. Abide within.

It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul’s flight,

If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.

We have scorched the snake, not killed it.

She’ll close and be herself whilst our poor malice

Remains in danger of her former tooth.

But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer,

Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep

In the affliction of these terrible dreams

That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,

Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,

Than on the torture of the mind to lie

In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave.

After life’s fitful fever he sleeps well.

Treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison,

Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing

Can touch him further.

So shall I, love,

And so I pray be you. Let your remembrance

Apply to Banquo; present him eminence

Both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we

Must lave our honors in these flattering streams

And make our faces vizards to our hearts,

Disguising what they are.

O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!

Thou know’st that Banquo and his Fleance lives.

There’s comfort yet; they are assailable.

Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown

His cloistered flight, ere to black Hecate’s summons

The shard-born beetle with his drowsy hums

Hath rung night’s yawning peal, there shall be done

A deed of dreadful note.

Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,

Till thou applaud the deed.—Come, seeling night,

Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day

And with thy bloody and invisible hand

Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond

Which keeps me pale. Light thickens, and the crow

Makes wing to th’ rooky wood.

Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,

Whiles night’s black agents to their preys do rouse.—

Thou marvel’st at my words, but hold thee still.

Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.

So prithee go with me.

You know your own degrees; sit down. At first

And last, the hearty welcome.

Ourself will mingle with society

And play the humble host.

Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time

We will require her welcome.

See, they encounter thee with their hearts’ thanks.

Both sides are even. Here I’ll sit i’ th’ midst.

Be large in mirth. Anon we’ll drink a measure

The table round. There’s blood upon thy face.

’Tis better thee without than he within.

Is he dispatched?

Thou art the best o’ th’ cutthroats,

Yet he’s good that did the like for Fleance.

If thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.

Then comes my fit again. I had else been perfect,

Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,

As broad and general as the casing air.

But now I am cabined, cribbed, confined, bound in

To saucy doubts and fears.—But Banquo’s safe?

Thanks for that.

There the grown serpent lies. The worm that’s fled

Hath nature that in time will venom breed,

No teeth for th’ present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow

We’ll hear ourselves again.

Sweet remembrancer!—

Now, good digestion wait on appetite

And health on both!

Here had we now our country’s honor roofed,

Were the graced person of our Banquo present,

Who may I rather challenge for unkindness

Than pity for mischance.

The table’s full.

Where?

Which of you have done this?

Thou canst not say I did it. Never shake

Thy gory locks at me.

Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that

Which might appall the devil.

Prithee, see there. Behold, look! Lo, how say you?

Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.—

If charnel houses and our graves must send

Those that we bury back, our monuments

Shall be the maws of kites.

If I stand here, I saw him.

Blood hath been shed ere now, i’ th’ olden time,

Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;

Ay, and since too, murders have been performed

Too terrible for the ear. The time has been

That, when the brains were out, the man would die,

And there an end. But now they rise again

With twenty mortal murders on their crowns

And push us from our stools. This is more strange

Than such a murder is.

I do forget.—

Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.

I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing

To those that know me. Come, love and health to all.

Then I’ll sit down.—Give me some wine. Fill full.

I drink to th’ general joy o’ th’ whole table

And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss.

Would he were here! To all, and him we thirst,

And all to all.

Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee.

Thy bones are marrowless; thy blood is cold;

Thou hast no speculation in those eyes

Which thou dost glare with.

What man dare, I dare.

Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,

The armed rhinoceros, or th’ Hyrcan tiger;

Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves

Shall never tremble. Or be alive again

And dare me to the desert with thy sword.

If trembling I inhabit then, protest me

The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!

Unreal mock’ry, hence! Why so, being gone,

I am a man again.—Pray you sit still.

Can such things be

And overcome us like a summer’s cloud,

Without our special wonder? You make me strange

Even to the disposition that I owe

When now I think you can behold such sights

And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks

When mine is blanched with fear.

It will have blood, they say; blood will have blood.

Stones have been known to move, and trees to speak.

Augurs and understood relations have

By maggot pies and choughs and rooks brought forth

The secret’st man of blood.—What is the night?

How say’st thou that Macduff denies his person

At our great bidding?

I hear it by the way; but I will send.

There’s not a one of them but in his house

I keep a servant fee’d. I will tomorrow

(And betimes I will) to the Weïrd Sisters.

More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know

By the worst means the worst. For mine own good,

All causes shall give way. I am in blood

Stepped in so far that, should I wade no more,

Returning were as tedious as go o’er.

Strange things I have in head that will to hand,

Which must be acted ere they may be scanned.

Come, we’ll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse

Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.

We are yet but young in deed.

How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags?

What is ’t you do?

I conjure you by that which you profess

(Howe’er you come to know it), answer me.

Though you untie the winds and let them fight

Against the churches, though the yeasty waves

Confound and swallow navigation up,

Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down,

Though castles topple on their warders’ heads,

Though palaces and pyramids do slope

Their heads to their foundations, though the treasure

Of nature’s germens tumble all together

Even till destruction sicken, answer me

To what I ask you.

Call ’em. Let me see ’em.

Tell me, thou unknown power—

Whate’er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks.

Thou hast harped my fear aright. But one word more—

Had I three ears, I’d hear thee.

Then live, Macduff; what need I fear of thee?

But yet I’ll make assurance double sure

And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live,

That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,

And sleep in spite of thunder.   What is this

That rises like the issue of a king

And wears upon his baby brow the round

And top of sovereignty?

That will never be.

Who can impress the forest, bid the tree

Unfix his earthbound root? Sweet bodements, good!

Rebellious dead, rise never till the Wood

Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth

Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath

To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart

Throbs to know one thing. Tell me, if your art

Can tell so much: shall Banquo’s issue ever

Reign in this kingdom?

I will be satisfied. Deny me this,

And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know!

Why sinks that cauldron? And what noise is this?

Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo. Down!

Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair,

Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.

A third is like the former.—Filthy hags,

Why do you show me this?—A fourth? Start, eyes!

What, will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom?

Another yet? A seventh? I’ll see no more.

And yet the eighth appears who bears a glass

Which shows me many more, and some I see

That twofold balls and treble scepters carry.

Horrible sight! Now I see ’tis true,

For the blood-boltered Banquo smiles upon me

And points at them for his.  What, is this so?

Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour

Stand aye accursèd in the calendar!—

Come in, without there.

Saw you the Weïrd Sisters?

Came they not by you?

Infected be the air whereon they ride,

And damned all those that trust them! I did hear

The galloping of horse. Who was ’t came by?

Fled to England?

Time, thou anticipat’st my dread exploits.

The flighty purpose never is o’ertook

Unless the deed go with it. From this moment

The very firstlings of my heart shall be

The firstlings of my hand. And even now,

To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done:

The castle of Macduff I will surprise,

Seize upon Fife, give to th’ edge o’ th’ sword

His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls

That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;

This deed I’ll do before this purpose cool.

But no more sights!—Where are these gentlemen?

Come bring me where they are.

Bring me no more reports. Let them fly all.

Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane

I cannot taint with fear. What’s the boy Malcolm?

Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know

All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:

“Fear not, Macbeth. No man that’s born of woman

Shall e’er have power upon thee.” Then fly, false thanes,

And mingle with the English epicures.

The mind I sway by and the heart I bear

Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.

The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!

Where got’st thou that goose-look?

Geese, villain?

Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,

Thou lily-livered boy. What soldiers, patch?

Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine

Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?

Take thy face hence. Seyton!—I am sick at heart

When I behold—Seyton, I say!—This push

Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.

I have lived long enough. My way of life

Is fall’n into the sere, the yellow leaf,

And that which should accompany old age,

As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,

I must not look to have, but in their stead

Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath

Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare not.—

Seyton!

What news more?

I’ll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked.

Give me my armor.

I’ll put it on.

Send out more horses. Skirr the country round.

Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armor.—

How does your patient, doctor?

Cure her of that.

Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,

Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,

Raze out the written troubles of the brain,

And with some sweet oblivious antidote

Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff

Which weighs upon the heart?

Throw physic to the dogs. I’ll none of it.—

Come, put mine armor on. Give me my staff.

Seyton, send out.—Doctor, the thanes fly from me.—

Come, sir, dispatch.—If thou couldst, doctor, cast

The water of my land, find her disease,

And purge it to a sound and pristine health,

I would applaud thee to the very echo

That should applaud again.—Pull ’t off, I say.—

What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug

Would scour these English hence? Hear’st thou of them?

Bring it after me.—

I will not be afraid of death and bane

Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.

Hang out our banners on the outward walls.

The cry is still “They come!” Our castle’s strength

Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie

Till famine and the ague eat them up.

Were they not forced with those that should be ours,

We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,

And beat them backward home.  What is that noise?

I have almost forgot the taste of fears.

The time has been my senses would have cooled

To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair

Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir

As life were in ’t. I have supped full with horrors.

Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,

Cannot once start me.    Wherefore was that cry?

She should have died hereafter.

There would have been a time for such a word.

Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow

Creeps in this petty pace from day to day

To the last syllable of recorded time,

And all our yesterdays have lighted fools

The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!

Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player

That struts and frets his hour upon the stage

And then is heard no more. It is a tale

Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,

Signifying nothing.

Thou com’st to use thy tongue: thy story quickly.

Well, say, sir.

Liar and slave!

If thou speak’st false,

Upon the next tree shall thou hang alive

Till famine cling thee. If thy speech be sooth,

I care not if thou dost for me as much.—

I pull in resolution and begin

To doubt th’ equivocation of the fiend,

That lies like truth. “Fear not till Birnam Wood

Do come to Dunsinane,” and now a wood

Comes toward Dunsinane.—Arm, arm, and out!—

If this which he avouches does appear,

There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.

I ’gin to be aweary of the sun

And wish th’ estate o’ th’ world were now undone.—

Ring the alarum bell!—Blow wind, come wrack,

At least we’ll die with harness on our back.

They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly,

But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What’s he

That was not born of woman? Such a one

Am I to fear, or none.

Thou ’lt be afraid to hear it.

My name’s Macbeth.

No, nor more fearful.

Thou wast born of woman.

But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,

Brandished by man that’s of a woman born.

Why should I play the Roman fool and die

On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes

Do better upon them.

Of all men else I have avoided thee.

But get thee back. My soul is too much charged

With blood of thine already.

Thou losest labor.

As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air

With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed.

Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;

I bear a charmèd life, which must not yield

To one of woman born.

Accursèd be that tongue that tells me so,

For it hath cowed my better part of man!

And be these juggling fiends no more believed

That palter with us in a double sense,

That keep the word of promise to our ear

And break it to our hope. I’ll not fight with thee.

I will not yield

To kiss the ground before young Malcolm’s feet

And to be baited with the rabble’s curse.

Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane

And thou opposed, being of no woman born,

Yet I will try the last. Before my body

I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff,

And damned be him that first cries “Hold! Enough!”

