


Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed

That you do lie so late?

What three things does drink especially

provoke?

I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.

Is thy master stirring?

Our knocking has awaked him. Here he comes.

Is the King stirring, worthy thane?

He did command me to call timely on him.

I have almost slipped the hour.

I know this is a joyful trouble to you,

But yet ’tis one.

I’ll make so bold to call,

For ’tis my limited service.

O horror, horror, horror!

Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!

Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.

Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope

The Lord’s anointed temple and stole thence

The life o’ th’ building.

Approach the chamber and destroy your sight

With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak.

See and then speak yourselves.  Awake, awake!

Ring the alarum bell.—Murder and treason!

Banquo and Donalbain, Malcolm, awake!

Shake off this downy sleep, death’s counterfeit,

And look on death itself. Up, up, and see

The great doom’s image. Malcolm, Banquo,

As from your graves rise up and walk like sprites

To countenance this horror.—Ring the bell.

O gentle lady,

’Tis not for you to hear what I can speak.

The repetition in a woman’s ear

Would murder as it fell.    O Banquo, Banquo,

Our royal master’s murdered.

Your royal father’s murdered.

Wherefore did you so?

Look to the lady.

And so do I.

Well contented.

Why, see you not?

Those that Macbeth hath slain.

They were suborned.

Malcolm and Donalbain, the King’s two sons,

Are stol’n away and fled, which puts upon them

Suspicion of the deed.

He is already named and gone to Scone

To be invested.

Carried to Colmekill,

The sacred storehouse of his predecessors

And guardian of their bones.

No, cousin, I’ll to Fife.

Well, may you see things well done there. Adieu,

Lest our old robes sit easier than our new.

Let us rather

Hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men,

Bestride our downfall’n birthdom. Each new morn

New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows

Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds

As if it felt with Scotland, and yelled out

Like syllable of dolor.

I am not treacherous.

I have lost my hopes.

Bleed, bleed, poor country!

Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,

For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy wrongs;

The title is affeered.—Fare thee well, lord.

I would not be the villain that thou think’st

For the whole space that’s in the tyrant’s grasp,

And the rich East to boot.

What should he be?

Not in the legions

Of horrid hell can come a devil more damned

In evils to top Macbeth.

Boundless intemperance

In nature is a tyranny. It hath been

Th’ untimely emptying of the happy throne

And fall of many kings. But fear not yet

To take upon you what is yours. You may

Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty

And yet seem cold—the time you may so hoodwink.

We have willing dames enough. There cannot be

That vulture in you to devour so many

As will to greatness dedicate themselves,

Finding it so inclined.

This avarice

Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root

Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been

The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear.

Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will

Of your mere own. All these are portable,

With other graces weighed.

O Scotland, Scotland!

Fit to govern?

No, not to live.—O nation miserable,

With an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered,

When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,

Since that the truest issue of thy throne

By his own interdiction stands accursed

And does blaspheme his breed?—Thy royal father

Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee,

Oft’ner upon her knees than on her feet,

Died every day she lived. Fare thee well.

These evils thou repeat’st upon thyself

Hath banished me from Scotland.—O my breast,

Thy hope ends here!

Such welcome and unwelcome things at once

’Tis hard to reconcile.

What’s the disease he means?

See who comes here.

My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.

Stands Scotland where it did?

O relation too nice and yet too true!

How does my wife?

And all my children?

The tyrant has not battered at their peace?

Be not a niggard of your speech. How goes ’t?

What concern they—

The general cause, or is it a fee-grief

Due to some single breast?

If it be mine,

Keep it not from me. Quickly let me have it.

Hum! I guess at it.

My children too?

And I must be from thence? My wife killed too?

He has no children. All my pretty ones?

Did you say “all”? O hell-kite! All?

What, all my pretty chickens and their dam

At one fell swoop?

I shall do so,

But I must also feel it as a man.

I cannot but remember such things were

That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on

And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,

They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,

Not for their own demerits, but for mine,

Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now.

O, I could play the woman with mine eyes

And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,

Cut short all intermission! Front to front

Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself.

Within my sword’s length set him. If he ’scape,

Heaven forgive him too.

Let our just censures

Attend the true event, and put we on

Industrious soldiership.

Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,

Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.

That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!

If thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine,

My wife and children’s ghosts will haunt me still.

I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms

Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,

Or else my sword with an unbattered edge

I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;

By this great clatter, one of greatest note

Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune,

And more I beg not.

Turn, hellhound, turn!

I have no words;

My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain

Than terms can give thee out.

Despair thy charm,

And let the angel whom thou still hast served

Tell thee Macduff was from his mother’s womb

Untimely ripped.

Then yield thee, coward,

And live to be the show and gaze o’ th’ time.

We’ll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,

Painted upon a pole, and underwrit

“Here may you see the tyrant.”

Hail, King! for so thou art. Behold where stands

Th’ usurper’s cursèd head. The time is free.

I see thee compassed with thy kingdom’s pearl,

That speak my salutation in their minds,

Whose voices I desire aloud with mine.

Hail, King of Scotland!

Hail, King of Scotland!

