


My lord.

If any in Vienna be of worth

To undergo such ample grace and honor,

It is Lord Angelo.

Lead forth and bring you back in happiness.

I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave

To have free speech with you; and it concerns me

To look into the bottom of my place.

A power I have, but of what strength and nature

I am not yet instructed.

I’ll wait upon your Honor.

Ay, but yet

Let us be keen and rather cut a little

Than fall and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman

Whom I would save had a most noble father.

Let but your Honor know,

Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,

That, in the working of your own affections,

Had time cohered with place, or place with wishing,

Or that the resolute acting of your blood

Could have attained th’ effect of your own purpose,

Whether you had not sometime in your life

Erred in this point which now you censure him,

And pulled the law upon you.

Be it as your wisdom will.

Well, heaven forgive him and forgive us all.

Some rise by sin and some by virtue fall.

Some run from brakes of ice and answer none,

And some condemnèd for a fault alone.

This comes off well. Here’s a wise

officer.

How know you that?

How? Thy wife?

Dost thou detest her therefore?

How dost thou know that, constable?

By the woman’s means?

Do you hear how he misplaces?

Go to, go to. No matter for the dish, sir.

Come, you are a tedious fool. To the purpose:

what was done to Elbow’s wife that he hath cause to

complain of? Come me to what was done to her.

No, sir, nor I mean it not.

I think no less. Good morrow to your Lordship

Now, sir, come on. What was done to Elbow’s wife,

once more?

Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?

Ay, sir, very well.

Well, I do so.

Why, no.

He’s in the right, constable. What say you to

it?

Which is the wiser here, Justice or Iniquity?

Is this true?

If he took you a box o’ th’ ear, you might have

your action of slander too.

Truly, officer, because he hath some offenses

in him that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst,

let him continue in his courses till thou know’st

what they are.

Where were you born, friend?

Are you of fourscore pounds a year?

So. What trade are you of, sir?

Your mistress’ name?

Hath she had any more than one husband?

Nine?—Come hither to me, Master Froth.

Master Froth, I would not have you acquainted with

tapsters; they will draw you, Master Froth, and you

will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no

more of you.

Well, no more of it, Master Froth. Farewell.

Come you hither to me, Master Tapster. What’s your

name, Master Tapster?

What else?

Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing

about you, so that in the beastliest sense you are

Pompey the Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd,

Pompey, howsoever you color it in being a tapster,

are you not? Come, tell me true. It shall be the

better for you.

How would you live, Pompey? By being a

bawd? What do you think of the trade, Pompey? Is it

a lawful trade?

But the law will not allow it, Pompey, nor it

shall not be allowed in Vienna.

No, Pompey.

There is pretty orders beginning, I can tell

you. It is but heading and hanging.

Thank you, good Pompey. And in requital of

your prophecy, hark you: I advise you let me not

find you before me again upon any complaint

whatsoever; no, not for dwelling where you do. If I

do, Pompey, I shall beat you to your tent and prove

a shrewd Caesar to you. In plain dealing, Pompey, I

shall have you whipped. So, for this time, Pompey,

fare you well.

Come hither to me, Master Elbow. Come

hither, Master Constable. How long have you been

in this place of constable?

I thought, by the readiness in the office, you

had continued in it some time. You say seven years

together?

Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do

you wrong to put you so oft upon ’t. Are there not

men in your ward sufficient to serve it?

Look you bring me in the names of some six

or seven, the most sufficient of your parish.

To my house. Fare you well.

What’s o’clock, think you?

I pray you home to dinner with me.

It grieves me for the death of Claudio,

But there’s no remedy.

It is but needful.

Mercy is not itself that oft looks so.

Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.

But yet, poor Claudio. There is no remedy.

Come, sir.

Go, away with her to prison.

Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit

in the same kind? This would make mercy

swear and play the tyrant.

That fellow is a fellow of much license. Let

him be called before us. Away with her to prison.—

Go to, no more words.

Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered.

Claudio must die tomorrow. Let him be furnished

with divines and have all charitable preparation. If

my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so

with him.

Good even, good father.

Of whence are you?

What news abroad i’ th’ world?

One that, above all other strifes, contended

especially to know himself.

Rather rejoicing to see another merry than

merry at anything which professed to make him

rejoice—a gentleman of all temperance. But leave

we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove

prosperous, and let me desire to know how you find

Claudio prepared. I am made to understand that

you have lent him visitation.

You have paid the heavens your function and

the prisoner the very debt of your calling. I have

labored for the poor gentleman to the extremest

shore of my modesty, but my brother justice have I

found so severe that he hath forced me to tell him

he is indeed Justice.

I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.

Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched

other.

I guess not.

He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch

of complaints, and to deliver us from devices

hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand

against us.

I shall, sir. Fare you well.

Happy return be to your royal Grace.

My lord, we’ll do it throughly.

Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar

Lodowick to be a dishonest person?

We shall entreat you to abide here till he

come, and enforce them against him. We shall find

this friar a notable fellow.

Call that same Isabel here once again. I would

speak with her.

Pray you, my lord, give me leave to

question. You shall see how I’ll handle her.

Say you?

I will go darkly to work with her.

Come on, mistress. Here’s a gentlewoman

denies all that you have said.

In very good time. Speak not you to him till

we call upon you.

Come, sir, did you set

these women on to slander Lord Angelo? They have

confessed you did.

How? Know you where you are?

The Duke’s in us, and we will hear you speak.

Look you speak justly.

Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,

Is ’t not enough thou hast suborned these women

To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth

And in the witness of his proper ear,

To call him villain? And then to glance from him

To th’ Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?—

Take him hence. To th’ rack with him. We’ll touse him

Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.

What? “Unjust”?

Slander to th’ state!

Away with him to prison.

Such a fellow is not to be talked withal. Away

with him to prison. Where is the Provost?

Away with him to prison. Lay bolts

enough upon him. Let him speak no more. Away

with those giglets too, and with the other confederate

companion.

My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonor

Than at the strangeness of it.

I am sorry one so learnèd and so wise

As you, Lord Angelo, have still appeared,

Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood

And lack of tempered judgment afterward.

