


And have you nuns no farther privileges?

Yes, truly. I speak not as desiring more,

But rather wishing a more strict restraint

Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.

Who’s that which calls?

Peace and prosperity! Who is ’t that calls?

Why “her unhappy brother”? Let me ask,

The rather for I now must make you know

I am that Isabella, and his sister.

Woe me, for what?

Sir, make me not your story.

You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.

Someone with child by him? My cousin Juliet?

Adoptedly, as schoolmaids change their names

By vain though apt affection.

O, let him marry her!

Doth he so

Seek his life?

Alas, what poor ability’s in me

To do him good?

My power? Alas, I doubt—

I’ll see what I can do.

I will about it straight,

No longer staying but to give the Mother

Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you.

Commend me to my brother. Soon at night

I’ll send him certain word of my success.

Good sir, adieu.

I am a woeful suitor to your Honor,

Please but your Honor hear me.

There is a vice that most I do abhor,

And most desire should meet the blow of justice,

For which I would not plead, but that I must;

For which I must not plead, but that I am

At war ’twixt will and will not.

I have a brother is condemned to die.

I do beseech you let it be his fault

And not my brother.

O just but severe law!

I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your Honor.

Must he needs die?

Yes, I do think that you might pardon him,

And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.

But can you if you would?

But might you do ’t and do the world no wrong

If so your heart were touched with that remorse

As mine is to him?

Too late? Why, no. I that do speak a word

May call it back again. Well believe this:

No ceremony that to great ones longs,

Not the king’s crown, nor the deputed sword,

The marshal’s truncheon, nor the judge’s robe

Become them with one half so good a grace

As mercy does.

If he had been as you, and you as he,

You would have slipped like him, but he like you

Would not have been so stern.

I would to heaven I had your potency,

And you were Isabel. Should it then be thus?

No. I would tell what ’twere to be a judge

And what a prisoner.

Alas, alas!

Why all the souls that were were forfeit once,

And He that might the vantage best have took

Found out the remedy. How would you be

If He which is the top of judgment should

But judge you as you are? O, think on that,

And mercy then will breathe within your lips

Like man new-made.

Tomorrow? O, that’s sudden! Spare him, spare him.

He’s not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens

We kill the fowl of season. Shall we serve heaven

With less respect than we do minister

To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you.

Who is it that hath died for this offense?

There’s many have committed it.

Yet show some pity.

So you must be the first that gives this sentence,

And he that suffers. O, it is excellent

To have a giant’s strength, but it is tyrannous

To use it like a giant.

Could great men thunder

As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet,

For every pelting, petty officer

Would use his heaven for thunder,

Nothing but thunder. Merciful heaven,

Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt

Splits the unwedgeable and gnarlèd oak,

Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man,

Dressed in a little brief authority,

Most ignorant of what he’s most assured,

His glassy essence, like an angry ape

Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven

As makes the angels weep, who with our spleens

Would all themselves laugh mortal.

We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.

Great men may jest with saints; ’tis wit in them,

But in the less, foul profanation.

That in the captain’s but a choleric word

Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

Because authority, though it err like others,

Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself

That skins the vice o’ th’ top. Go to your bosom,

Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know

That’s like my brother’s fault. If it confess

A natural guiltiness such as is his,

Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue

Against my brother’s life.

Gentle my lord, turn back.

Hark how I’ll bribe you. Good my lord, turn back.

Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.

Not with fond sicles of the tested gold,

Or stones whose rate are either rich or poor

As fancy values them, but with true prayers

That shall be up at heaven and enter there

Ere sunrise, prayers from preservèd souls,

From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate

To nothing temporal.

Heaven keep your Honor safe.

At what hour tomorrow

Shall I attend your Lordship?

Save your Honor.

I am come to know your pleasure.

Even so. Heaven keep your Honor.

Under your sentence?

When, I beseech you? That in his reprieve,

Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted

That his soul sicken not.

’Tis set down so in heaven, but not in Earth.

Sir, believe this:

I had rather give my body than my soul.

How say you?

Please you to do ’t,

I’ll take it as a peril to my soul,

It is no sin at all, but charity.

That I do beg his life, if it be sin

Heaven let me bear it. You granting of my suit,

If that be sin, I’ll make it my morn prayer

To have it added to the faults of mine

And nothing of your answer.

Let me be ignorant and in nothing good,

But graciously to know I am no better.

So.

True.

As much for my poor brother as myself.

That is, were I under the terms of death,

Th’ impression of keen whips I’d wear as rubies

And strip myself to death as to a bed

That longing have been sick for, ere I’d yield

My body up to shame.

And ’twere the cheaper way.

Better it were a brother died at once

Than that a sister, by redeeming him,

Should die forever.

Ignomy in ransom and free pardon

Are of two houses. Lawful mercy

Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

O, pardon me, my lord. It oft falls out,

To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean.

I something do excuse the thing I hate

For his advantage that I dearly love.

Else let my brother die,

If not a fedary but only he

Owe and succeed thy weakness.

Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,

Which are as easy broke as they make forms.

Women—help, heaven—men their creation mar

In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail,

For we are soft as our complexions are,

And credulous to false prints.

I have no tongue but one. Gentle my lord,

Let me entreat you speak the former language.

My brother did love Juliet,

And you tell me that he shall die for ’t.

I know your virtue hath a license in ’t

Which seems a little fouler than it is

To pluck on others.

Ha! Little honor to be much believed,

And most pernicious purpose. Seeming, seeming!

I will proclaim thee, Angelo, look for ’t.

Sign me a present pardon for my brother

Or with an outstretched throat I’ll tell the world aloud

What man thou art.

To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,

Who would believe me? O, perilous mouths,

That bear in them one and the selfsame tongue,

Either of condemnation or approof,

Bidding the law make curtsy to their will,

Hooking both right and wrong to th’ appetite,

To follow as it draws. I’ll to my brother.

Though he hath fall’n by prompture of the blood,

Yet hath he in him such a mind of honor

That, had he twenty heads to tender down

On twenty bloody blocks, he’d yield them up

Before his sister should her body stoop

To such abhorred pollution.

Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die.

More than our brother is our chastity.

I’ll tell him yet of Angelo’s request,

And fit his mind to death, for his soul’s rest.

What ho! Peace here, grace, and good company.

My business is a word or two with Claudio.

Why,

As all comforts are, most good, most good indeed.

Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,

Intends you for his swift ambassador,

Where you shall be an everlasting leiger;

Therefore your best appointment make with speed.

Tomorrow you set on.

None but such remedy as, to save a head,

To cleave a heart in twain.

Yes, brother, you may live.

There is a devilish mercy in the judge,

If you’ll implore it, that will free your life

But fetter you till death.

Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,

Though all the world’s vastidity you had,

To a determined scope.

In such a one as, you consenting to ’t,

Would bark your honor from that trunk you bear

And leave you naked.

O, I do fear thee, Claudio, and I quake

Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,

And six or seven winters more respect

Than a perpetual honor. Dar’st thou die?

The sense of death is most in apprehension,

And the poor beetle that we tread upon

In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great

As when a giant dies.

There spake my brother! There my father’s grave

Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die.

Thou art too noble to conserve a life

In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy—

Whose settled visage and deliberate word

Nips youth i’ th’ head, and follies doth enew

As falcon doth the fowl—is yet a devil.

His filth within being cast, he would appear

A pond as deep as hell.

O, ’tis the cunning livery of hell

The damned’st body to invest and cover

In prenzie guards. Dost thou think, Claudio,

If I would yield him my virginity

Thou mightst be freed?

Yes, he would give ’t thee; from this rank offense,

So to offend him still. This night’s the time

That I should do what I abhor to name,

Or else thou diest tomorrow.

O, were it but my life,

I’d throw it down for your deliverance

As frankly as a pin.

Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.

Which is the least?

What says my brother?

And shamèd life a hateful.

Alas, alas!

O, you beast!

O faithless coward, O dishonest wretch,

Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?

Is ’t not a kind of incest to take life

From thine own sister’s shame? What should I think?

Heaven shield my mother played my father fair,

For such a warpèd slip of wilderness

Ne’er issued from his blood. Take my defiance;

Die, perish. Might but my bending down

Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.

I’ll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,

No word to save thee.

O, fie, fie, fie!

Thy sin’s not accidental, but a trade.

Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd.

’Tis best that thou diest quickly.

What is your will?

I have no superfluous leisure. My stay must

be stolen out of other affairs, but I will attend you

awhile.

I am now going to resolve him. I had rather

my brother die by the law than my son should be

unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good

duke deceived in Angelo! If ever he return, and I

can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or

discover his government.

Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to

do anything that appears not foul in the truth of my

spirit.

I have heard of the lady, and good words

went with her name.

Can this be so? Did Angelo so leave her?

What a merit were it in death to take this

poor maid from the world! What corruption in this

life, that it will let this man live! But how out of this

can she avail?

Show me how, good father.

The image of it gives me content already, and

I trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.

I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well,

good father.

He hath a garden circummured with brick,

Whose western side is with a vineyard backed;

And to that vineyard is a planchèd gate

That makes his opening with this bigger key.

This other doth command a little door

Which from the vineyard to the garden leads.

There have I made my promise, upon the

Heavy middle of the night, to call upon him.

I have ta’en a due and wary note upon ’t.

With whispering and most guilty diligence,

In action all of precept, he did show me

The way twice o’er.

No, none, but only a repair i’ th’ dark,

And that I have possessed him my most stay

Can be but brief, for I have made him know

I have a servant comes with me along

That stays upon me, whose persuasion is

I come about my brother.

I do desire the like.

She’ll take the enterprise upon her, father,

If you advise it.

Little have you to say

When you depart from him, but, soft and low,

“Remember now my brother.”

Peace, ho, be here.

Ho, by your leave.

The better, given me by so holy a man.

Hath yet the Deputy sent my brother’s pardon?

Nay, but it is not so.

O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!

Unhappy Claudio, wretched Isabel,

Injurious world, most damnèd Angelo!

I am directed by you.

To speak so indirectly I am loath.

I would say the truth, but to accuse him so

That is your part; yet I am advised to do it,

He says, to veil full purpose.

Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure

He speak against me on the adverse side,

I should not think it strange, for ’tis a physic

That’s bitter to sweet end.

O peace, the Friar is come.

Justice, O royal duke. Vail your regard

Upon a wronged—I would fain have said, a maid.

O worthy prince, dishonor not your eye

By throwing it on any other object

Till you have heard me in my true complaint

And given me justice, justice, justice, justice.

O worthy duke,

You bid me seek redemption of the devil.

Hear me yourself, for that which I must speak

Must either punish me, not being believed,

Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here.

By course of justice!

Most strange, but yet most truly will I speak.

That Angelo’s forsworn, is it not strange?

That Angelo’s a murderer, is ’t not strange?

That Angelo is an adulterous thief,

An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,

Is it not strange, and strange?

It is not truer he is Angelo

Than this is all as true as it is strange.

Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth

To th’ end of reck’ning.

O prince, I conjure thee, as thou believest

There is another comfort than this world,

That thou neglect me not with that opinion

That I am touched with madness. Make not impossible

That which but seems unlike. ’Tis not impossible

But one, the wicked’st caitiff on the ground,

May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute

As Angelo. Even so may Angelo,

In all his dressings, caracts, titles, forms,

Be an archvillain. Believe it, royal prince,

If he be less, he’s nothing, but he’s more,

Had I more name for badness.

O gracious duke,

Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason

For inequality, but let your reason serve

To make the truth appear where it seems hid,

And hide the false seems true.

I am the sister of one Claudio,

Condemned upon the act of fornication

To lose his head, condemned by Angelo.

I, in probation of a sisterhood,

Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio

As then the messenger—

That’s he indeed.

This gentleman told somewhat of my tale.

I went

To this pernicious caitiff deputy—

Pardon it;

The phrase is to the matter.

In brief, to set the needless process by:

How I persuaded, how I prayed and kneeled,

How he refelled me, and how I replied—

For this was of much length—the vile conclusion

I now begin with grief and shame to utter.

He would not, but by gift of my chaste body

To his concupiscible intemperate lust,

Release my brother; and after much debatement,

My sisterly remorse confutes mine honor,

And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes,

His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant

For my poor brother’s head.

O, that it were as like as it is true!

And is this all?

Then, O you blessèd ministers above,

Keep me in patience, and with ripened time

Unfold the evil which is here wrapped up

In countenance. Heaven shield your Grace from woe,

As I, thus wronged, hence unbelievèd go.

One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.

O, give me pardon

That I, your vassal, have employed and pained

Your unknown sovereignty.

I do, my lord.

Most bounteous sir,

Look, if it please you, on this man condemned

As if my brother lived. I partly think

A due sincerity governed his deeds

Till he did look on me. Since it is so,

Let him not die. My brother had but justice,

In that he did the thing for which he died.

For Angelo,

His act did not o’ertake his bad intent,

And must be buried but as an intent

That perished by the way. Thoughts are no subjects,

Intents but merely thoughts.

