


Yonder man is carried to prison.

A woman.

Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

No, but there’s a woman with maid by him.

You have not heard of the proclamation, have you?

All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be

plucked down.

They shall stand for seed. They had gone down

too, but that a wise burgher put in for them.

To the ground, mistress.

Come, fear not you. Good counselors lack no

clients. Though you change your place, you need

not change your trade. I’ll be your tapster still.

Courage. There will be pity taken on you. You that

have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you

will be considered.

Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the Provost

to prison. And there’s Madam Juliet.

He cannot, sir. He’s out at elbow.

Sir, if it please your Honor, this is

not so.

Sir, she came in great with child, and longing,

saving your Honor’s reverence, for stewed prunes.

Sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very

distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit dish, a dish

of some threepence; your Honors have seen such

dishes; they are not china dishes, but very good

dishes—

No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in

the right. But to the point: as I say, this Mistress

Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and being great-bellied,

and longing, as I said, for prunes; and

having but two in the dish, as I said, Master Froth

here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as I said,

and, as I say, paying for them very honestly—for, as

you know, Master Froth, I could not give you threepence

again—

Very well. You being then, if you be remembered,

cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes—

Why, very well. I telling you then, if you be

remembered, that such a one and such a one were

past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept

very good diet, as I told you—

Why, very well then—

Sir, your Honor cannot come to that yet.

Sir, but you shall come to it, by your Honor’s

leave. And I beseech you, look into Master Froth

here, sir, a man of fourscore pound a year, whose

father died at Hallowmas—was ’t not at Hallowmas,

Master Froth?

Why, very well. I hope here be truths.—He,

sir, sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir—

’Twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you

have a delight to sit, have you not?

Why, very well then. I hope here be truths.

Once, sir? There was nothing done to her

once.

I beseech your Honor, ask me.

I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman’s

face.—Good Master Froth, look upon his Honor.

’Tis for a good purpose.—Doth your Honor mark

his face?

Nay, I beseech you, mark it well.

Doth your Honor see any harm in his face?

I’ll be supposed upon a book, his face is the

worst thing about him. Good, then, if his face be the

worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do

the Constable’s wife any harm? I would know that

of your Honor.

By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected

person than any of us all.

Sir, she was respected with him before he

married with her.

A tapster, a poor widow’s tapster.

Mistress Overdone.

Nine, sir. Overdone by the last.

Pompey.

Bum, sir.

Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.

If the law would allow it, sir.

Does your Worship mean to geld and splay all

the youth of the city?

Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to ’t

then. If your Worship will take order for the drabs

and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.

If you head and hang all that offend that way

but for ten year together, you’ll be glad to give out a

commission for more heads. If this law hold in

Vienna ten year, I’ll rent the fairest house in it after

threepence a bay. If you live to see this come to

pass, say Pompey told you so.

I thank your Worship for your good counsel.

But I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune

shall better determine.

Whip me? No, no, let carman whip his jade.

The valiant heart’s not whipped out of his trade.

’Twas never merry world since, of two usuries,

the merriest was put down, and the worser allowed

by order of law a furred gown to keep him warm,

and furred with fox and lambskins too, to signify

that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for

the facing.

Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir. But yet,

sir, I would prove—

I spy comfort, I cry bail. Here’s a gentleman

and a friend of mine.

Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and

she is herself in the tub.

Yes, faith, sir.

I hope, sir, your good Worship will be my bail.

You will not bail me, then, sir?

If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be

a married man, he’s his wife’s head, and I can never

cut off a woman’s head.

Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of

mind, but yet I will be content to be a lawful

hangman. I would be glad to receive some instruction

from my fellow partner.

Pray, sir, by your good favor—for surely, sir, a

good favor you have, but that you have a hanging

look—do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?

Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery;

and your whores, sir, being members of my occupation,

using painting, do prove my occupation a

mystery; but what mystery there should be in hanging,

if I should be hanged, I cannot imagine.

Proof?

Sir, I will serve him, for I do find your hangman

is a more penitent trade than your bawd. He

doth oftener ask forgiveness.

I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you have

occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find

me yare. For truly, sir, for your kindness, I owe

you a good turn.

I am as well acquainted here as I was in our

house of profession. One would think it were Mistress

Overdone’s own house, for here be many of

her old customers. First, here’s young Master Rash.

He’s in for a commodity of brown paper and old

ginger, ninescore and seventeen pounds, of which

he made five marks ready money. Marry, then

ginger was not much in request, for the old women

were all dead. Then is there here one Master Caper,

at the suit of Master Three-pile the mercer, for some

four suits of peach-colored satin, which now

peaches him a beggar. Then have we here young

Dizzy and young Master Deep-vow, and Master

Copper-spur and Master Starve-lackey the rapier-and-dagger

man, and young Drop-heir that killed

lusty Pudding, and Master Forth-light the tilter, and

brave Master Shoe-tie the great traveler, and wild

Half-can that stabbed Pots, and I think forty more,

all great doers in our trade, and are now “for the

Lord’s sake.”

Master Barnardine, you must rise

and be hanged, Master Barnardine.

Your friends,

sir, the hangman. You must be so good, sir, to rise

and be put to death.

Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till

you are executed, and sleep afterwards.

He is coming, sir, he is coming. I hear his

straw rustle.

Very ready, sir.

O, the better, sir, for he that drinks all night

and is hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the

sounder all the next day.

