


How now, spirit? Whither wander you?

The King doth keep his revels here tonight.

Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,

For Oberon is passing fell and wrath

Because that she, as her attendant, hath

A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king;

She never had so sweet a changeling.

And jealous Oberon would have the child

Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild.

But she perforce withholds the lovèd boy,

Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her joy.

And now they never meet in grove or green,

By fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen,

But they do square, that all their elves for fear

Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.

Thou speakest aright.

I am that merry wanderer of the night.

I jest to Oberon and make him smile

When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,

Neighing in likeness of a filly foal.

And sometime lurk I in a gossip’s bowl

In very likeness of a roasted crab,

And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob

And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.

The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,

Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;

Then slip I from her bum, down topples she

And “Tailor!” cries and falls into a cough,

And then the whole choir hold their hips and loffe

And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear

A merrier hour was never wasted there.

But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.

I remember.

I’ll put a girdle round about the Earth

In forty minutes.

Ay, there it is.

Fear not, my lord. Your servant shall do so.

Through the forest have I gone,

But Athenian found I none

On whose eyes I might approve

This flower’s force in stirring love.

Night and silence! Who is here?

Weeds of Athens he doth wear.

This is he my master said

Despisèd the Athenian maid.

And here the maiden, sleeping sound

On the dank and dirty ground.

Pretty soul, she durst not lie

Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.—

Churl, upon thy eyes I throw

All the power this charm doth owe.

When thou wak’st, let love forbid

Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.

So, awake when I am gone,

For I must now to Oberon.

What hempen homespuns have we swagg’ring here

So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?

What, a play toward? I’ll be an auditor—

An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.

A stranger Pyramus than e’er played here.

I’ll follow you. I’ll lead you about a round,

Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier.

Sometime a horse I’ll be, sometime a hound,

A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire,

And neigh and bark and grunt and roar and burn,

Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.

My mistress with a monster is in love.

Near to her close and consecrated bower,

While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,

A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,

That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,

Were met together to rehearse a play

Intended for great Theseus’ nuptial day.

The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,

Who Pyramus presented in their sport,

Forsook his scene and entered in a brake.

When I did him at this advantage take,

An ass’s noll I fixèd on his head.

Anon his Thisbe must be answerèd,

And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,

As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,

Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,

Rising and cawing at the gun’s report,

Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,

So at his sight away his fellows fly,

And, at our stamp, here o’er and o’er one falls.

He “Murder” cries and help from Athens calls.

Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,

Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;

For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch,

Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.

I led them on in this distracted fear

And left sweet Pyramus translated there.

When in that moment, so it came to pass,

Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.

I took him sleeping—that is finished, too—

And the Athenian woman by his side,

That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.

This is the woman, but not this the man.

Then fate o’errules, that, one man holding troth,

A million fail, confounding oath on oath.

I go, I go, look how I go,

Swifter than arrow from the Tartar’s bow.

Captain of our fairy band,

Helena is here at hand,

And the youth, mistook by me,

Pleading for a lover’s fee.

Shall we their fond pageant see?

Lord, what fools these mortals be!

Then will two at once woo one.

That must needs be sport alone.

And those things do best please me

That befall prepost’rously.

Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.

Did not you tell me I should know the man

By the Athenian garments he had on?

And so far blameless proves my enterprise

That I have ’nointed an Athenian’s eyes;

And so far am I glad it so did sort,

As this their jangling I esteem a sport.

My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,

For night’s swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,

And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger,

At whose approach, ghosts wand’ring here and there

Troop home to churchyards. Damnèd spirits all,

That in crossways and floods have burial,

Already to their wormy beds are gone.

For fear lest day should look their shames upon,

They willfully themselves exile from light

And must for aye consort with black-browed night.

Up and down, up and down,

I will lead them up and down.

I am feared in field and town.

Goblin, lead them up and down.

Here comes one.

Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?

Follow me, then, to

plainer ground.

Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,

Telling the bushes that thou look’st for wars,

And wilt not come? Come, recreant! Come, thou child!

I’ll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled

That draws a sword on thee.

Follow my voice. We’ll try no manhood here.

Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com’st thou not?

 Come hither. I am here.

Yet but three? Come one more.

Two of both kinds makes up four.

Here she comes, curst and sad.

Cupid is a knavish lad

Thus to make poor females mad.

On the ground

Sleep sound.

I’ll apply

To your eye,

Gentle lover, remedy.

When thou wak’st,

Thou tak’st

True delight

In the sight

Of thy former lady’s eye.

And the country proverb known,

That every man should take his own,

In your waking shall be shown.

Jack shall have Jill;

Naught shall go ill;

The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.

Now, when thou wak’st, with thine own fool’s eyes peep.

Fairy king, attend and mark.

I do hear the morning lark.

Now the hungry lion roars,

And the wolf behowls the moon,

Whilst the heavy plowman snores,

All with weary task fordone.

Now the wasted brands do glow,

Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,

Puts the wretch that lies in woe

In remembrance of a shroud.

Now it is the time of night

That the graves, all gaping wide,

Every one lets forth his sprite

In the church-way paths to glide.

And we fairies, that do run

By the triple Hecate’s team

From the presence of the sun,

Following darkness like a dream,

Now are frolic. Not a mouse

Shall disturb this hallowed house.

I am sent with broom before,

To sweep the dust behind the door.

If we shadows have offended,

Think but this and all is mended:

That you have but slumbered here

While these visions did appear.

And this weak and idle theme,

No more yielding but a dream,

Gentles, do not reprehend.

If you pardon, we will mend.

And, as I am an honest Puck,

If we have unearnèd luck

Now to ’scape the serpent’s tongue,

We will make amends ere long.

Else the Puck a liar call.

So good night unto you all.

Give me your hands, if we be friends,

And Robin shall restore amends.

