


Is all our company here?

Here is the scroll of every man’s name which

is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our

interlude before the Duke and the Duchess on his

wedding day at night.

Marry, our play is The most lamentable

comedy and most cruel death of Pyramus and

Thisbe.

Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.

You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.

A lover that kills himself most gallant for love.

Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.

Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.

It is the lady that Pyramus must love.

That’s all one. You shall play it in a mask, and

you may speak as small as you will.

No, no, you must play Pyramus—and, Flute,

you Thisbe.

Robin Starveling, the tailor.

Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe’s

mother.—Tom Snout, the tinker.

You, Pyramus’ father.—Myself, Thisbe’s

father.—Snug the joiner, you the lion’s part.—

And I hope here is a play fitted.

You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but

roaring.

An you should do it too terribly, you would

fright the Duchess and the ladies that they would

shriek, and that were enough to hang us all.

That would hang us, every mother’s son.

You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus

is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one

shall see in a summer’s day, a most lovely gentlemanlike

man. Therefore you must needs play

Pyramus.

Why, what you will.

Some of your French crowns have no hair at

all, and then you will play barefaced. But, masters,

here are your parts, and I am

to entreat you, request you, and desire you to con

them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace

wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. There

will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall

be dogged with company and our devices known. In

the meantime I will draw a bill of properties such as

our play wants. I pray you fail me not.

At the Duke’s Oak we meet.

Pat, pat. And here’s a marvels convenient

place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be

our stage, this hawthorn brake our tiring-house,

and we will do it in action as we will do it before

the Duke.

What sayest thou, bully Bottom?

Well, we will have such a prologue, and it shall

be written in eight and six.

Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard

things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber,

for you know Pyramus and Thisbe meet by

moonlight.

Yes, it doth shine that night.

Ay, or else one must come in with a bush of

thorns and a lantern and say he comes to disfigure

or to present the person of Moonshine. Then there

is another thing: we must have a wall in the great

chamber, for Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story,

did talk through the chink of a wall.

If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down,

every mother’s son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus,

you begin. When you have spoken your

speech, enter into that brake, and so everyone

according to his cue.

Speak, Pyramus.—Thisbe, stand forth.

Odors, odors!

Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand

he goes but to see a noise that he heard and is to

come again.

“Ninus’ tomb,” man! Why, you must not

speak that yet. That you answer to Pyramus. You

speak all your part at once, cues and all.—Pyramus,

enter. Your cue is past. It is “never tire.”

O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray,

masters, fly, masters! Help!

Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art

translated!

Have you sent to Bottom’s house? Is he come

home yet?

It is not possible. You have not a man in all

Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.

Yea, and the best person too, and he is a very

paramour for a sweet voice.

Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy

hour!

Let us hear, sweet Bottom.

If we offend, it is with our goodwill.

That you should think we come not to offend,

But with goodwill. To show our simple skill,

That is the true beginning of our end.

Consider, then, we come but in despite.

We do not come, as minding to content you,

Our true intent is. All for your delight

We are not here. That you should here repent you,

The actors are at hand, and, by their show,

You shall know all that you are like to know.

Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show.

But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.

This man is Pyramus, if you would know.

This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain.

This man with lime and roughcast doth present

“Wall,” that vile wall which did these lovers sunder;

And through Wall’s chink, poor souls, they are content

To whisper, at the which let no man wonder.

This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,

Presenteth “Moonshine,” for, if you will know,

By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn

To meet at Ninus’ tomb, there, there to woo.

This grisly beast (which “Lion” hight by name)

The trusty Thisbe coming first by night

Did scare away or rather did affright;

And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,

Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.

Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,

And finds his trusty Thisbe’s mantle slain.

Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,

He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast.

And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,

His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,

Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain

At large discourse, while here they do remain.

