


Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? Say, when?

You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?

I will not fail you.

Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing,

more than any man in all Venice. His reasons are as

two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff: you

shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you

have them, they are not worth the search.

’Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,

How much I have disabled mine estate

By something showing a more swelling port

Than my faint means would grant continuance.

Nor do I now make moan to be abridged

From such a noble rate. But my chief care

Is to come fairly off from the great debts

Wherein my time, something too prodigal,

Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio,

I owe the most in money and in love,

And from your love I have a warranty

To unburden all my plots and purposes

How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

In my school days, when I had lost one shaft,

I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight

The selfsame way with more advisèd watch

To find the other forth; and by adventuring both

I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof

Because what follows is pure innocence.

I owe you much, and, like a willful youth,

That which I owe is lost. But if you please

To shoot another arrow that self way

Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,

As I will watch the aim, or to find both

Or bring your latter hazard back again,

And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

In Belmont is a lady richly left,

And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,

Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes

I did receive fair speechless messages.

Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued

To Cato’s daughter, Brutus’ Portia.

Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,

For the four winds blow in from every coast

Renownèd suitors, and her sunny locks

Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,

Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos’ strond,

And many Jasons come in quest of her.

O my Antonio, had I but the means

To hold a rival place with one of them,

I have a mind presages me such thrift

That I should questionless be fortunate!

Ay, sir, for three months.

For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall

be bound.

May you stead me? Will you pleasure me?

Shall I know your answer?

Your answer to that?

Have you heard any imputation to the

contrary?

Be assured you may.

If it please you to dine with us.

This is Signior Antonio.

Shylock, do you hear?

This were kindness!

You shall not seal to such a bond for me!

I’ll rather dwell in my necessity.

I like not fair terms and a villain’s mind.

You may do so, but let it be

so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five

of the clock. See these letters delivered, put the

liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come

anon to my lodging.

Gramercy. Wouldst thou aught with me?

One speak for both. What would you?

I know thee well. Thou hast obtained thy suit.

Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,

And hath preferred thee, if it be preferment

To leave a rich Jew’s service, to become

The follower of so poor a gentleman.

Thou speak’st it well.—Go, father, with thy son.—

Take leave of thy old master, and inquire

My lodging out. Give him a livery

More guarded than his fellows’. See it done.

I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this.

These things being bought and orderly bestowed,

Return in haste, for I do feast tonight

My best esteemed acquaintance. Hie thee, go.

Gratiano!

You have obtained it.

Why then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano,

Thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice—

Parts that become thee happily enough,

And in such eyes as ours appear not faults.

But where thou art not known—why, there they show

Something too liberal. Pray thee take pain

To allay with some cold drops of modesty

Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior

I be misconstered in the place I go to,

And lose my hopes.

Well, we shall see your bearing.

No, that were pity.

I would entreat you rather to put on

Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends

That purpose merriment. But fare you well.

I have some business.

Let me choose,

For as I am, I live upon the rack.

None but that ugly treason of mistrust,

Which makes me fear th’ enjoying of my love.

There may as well be amity and life

’Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.

Promise me life and I’ll confess the truth.

“Confess and love”

Had been the very sum of my confession.

O happy torment, when my torturer

Doth teach me answers for deliverance!

But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

So may the outward shows be least themselves;

The world is still deceived with ornament.

In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt

But, being seasoned with a gracious voice,

Obscures the show of evil? In religion,

What damnèd error but some sober brow

Will bless it and approve it with a text,

Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?

There is no vice so simple but assumes

Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.

How many cowards whose hearts are all as false

As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins

The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,

Who inward searched have livers white as milk,

And these assume but valor’s excrement

To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,

And you shall see ’tis purchased by the weight,

Which therein works a miracle in nature,

Making them lightest that wear most of it.

So are those crispèd snaky golden locks,

Which maketh such wanton gambols with the wind

Upon supposèd fairness, often known

To be the dowry of a second head,

The skull that bred them in the sepulcher.

Thus ornament is but the guilèd shore

To a most dangerous sea, the beauteous scarf

Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,

The seeming truth which cunning times put on

To entrap the wisest. Therefore, then, thou gaudy gold,

Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee.

Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge

’Tween man and man. But thou, thou meager lead,

Which rather threaten’st than dost promise aught,

Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence,

And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!

What find I here?

Fair Portia’s counterfeit! What demigod

Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?

Or whether, riding on the balls of mine,

Seem they in motion? Here are severed lips

Parted with sugar breath; so sweet a bar

Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs

The painter plays the spider, and hath woven

A golden mesh t’ entrap the hearts of men

Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes!

How could he see to do them? Having made one,

Methinks it should have power to steal both his

And leave itself unfurnished. Yet look how far

The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow

In underprizing it, so far this shadow

Doth limp behind the substance. Here’s the scroll,

The continent and summary of my fortune.

You that choose not by the view

Chance as fair and choose as true.

Since this fortune falls to you,

Be content and seek no new.

If you be well pleased with this

And hold your fortune for your bliss,

Turn you where your lady is,

And claim her with a loving kiss.

A gentle scroll! Fair lady, by your leave,

I come by note to give and to receive.

Like one of two contending in a prize

That thinks he hath done well in people’s eyes,

Hearing applause and universal shout,

Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt

Whether those peals of praise be his or no,

So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,

As doubtful whether what I see be true,

Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.

Madam, you have bereft me of all words.

Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,

And there is such confusion in my powers

As after some oration fairly spoke

By a belovèd prince there doth appear

Among the buzzing pleasèd multitude,

Where every something being blent together

Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy

Expressed and not expressed. But when this ring

Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.

O, then be bold to say Bassanio’s dead!

With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.

And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?

Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.

Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither—

If that the youth of my new int’rest here

Have power to bid you welcome. By your leave,

I bid my very friends and countrymen,

Sweet Portia, welcome.

Ere I ope his letter,

I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.

O sweet Portia,

Here are a few of the unpleasant’st words

That ever blotted paper. Gentle lady,

When I did first impart my love to you,

I freely told you all the wealth I had

Ran in my veins: I was a gentleman.

And then I told you true; and yet, dear lady,

Rating myself at nothing, you shall see

How much I was a braggart. When I told you

My state was nothing, I should then have told you

That I was worse than nothing; for indeed

I have engaged myself to a dear friend,

Engaged my friend to his mere enemy

To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,

The paper as the body of my friend,

And every word in it a gaping wound

Issuing life blood.—But is it true, Salerio?

Hath all his ventures failed? What, not one hit?

From Tripolis, from Mexico and England,

From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,

And not one vessel ’scape the dreadful touch

Of merchant-marring rocks?

The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,

The best conditioned and unwearied spirit

In doing courtesies, and one in whom

The ancient Roman honor more appears

Than any that draws breath in Italy.

For me, three thousand ducats.

Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my

creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to

the Jew is forfeit, and since in paying it, it is impossible

I should live, all debts are cleared between you and I if

I might but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use

your pleasure. If your love do not persuade you to

come, let not my letter.

Since I have your good leave to go away,

I will make haste. But till I come again,

No bed shall e’er be guilty of my stay,

Nor rest be interposer ’twixt us twain.

This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,

To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

Do all men kill the things they do not love?

Every offence is not a hate at first.

For thy three thousand ducats here is six.

Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!

The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all

Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood!

Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?

Yes. Here I tender it for him in the court,

Yea, twice the sum. If that will not suffice,

I will be bound to pay it ten times o’er

On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart.

If this will not suffice, it must appear

That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you,

Wrest once the law to your authority.

To do a great right, do a little wrong,

And curb this cruel devil of his will.

Antonio, I am married to a wife

Which is as dear to me as life itself,

But life itself, my wife, and all the world

Are not with me esteemed above thy life.

I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all

Here to this devil, to deliver you.

Here is the money.

I have it ready for thee. Here it is.

Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend

Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted

Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof

Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew

We freely cope your courteous pains withal.

Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further.

Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,

Not as fee. Grant me two things, I pray you:

Not to deny me, and to pardon me.

This ring, good sir? Alas, it is a trifle.

I will not shame myself to give you this.

There’s more depends on this than on the value.

The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,

And find it out by proclamation.

Only for this, I pray you pardon me.

Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,

And when she put it on, she made me vow

That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.

Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him.

Give him the ring, and bring him if thou canst

Unto Antonio’s house. Away, make haste.

Come, you and I will thither presently,

And in the morning early will we both

Fly toward Belmont.—Come, Antonio.

We should hold day with the Antipodes

If you would walk in absence of the sun.

I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend.

This is the man, this is Antonio,

To whom I am so infinitely bound.

Why, I were best to cut my left hand off

And swear I lost the ring defending it.

If I could add a lie unto a fault,

I would deny it, but you see my finger

Hath not the ring upon it. It is gone.

Sweet Portia,

If you did know to whom I gave the ring,

If you did know for whom I gave the ring,

And would conceive for what I gave the ring,

And how unwillingly I left the ring,

When naught would be accepted but the ring,

You would abate the strength of your displeasure.

No, by my honor, madam, by my soul,

No woman had it, but a civil doctor,

Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me

And begged the ring, the which I did deny him

And suffered him to go displeased away,

Even he that had held up the very life

Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?

I was enforced to send it after him.

I was beset with shame and courtesy.

My honor would not let ingratitude

So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady,

For by these blessèd candles of the night,

Had you been there, I think you would have begged

The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.

Portia, forgive me this enforcèd wrong,

And in the hearing of these many friends

I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,

Wherein I see myself—

Nay, but hear me.

Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear

I never more will break an oath with thee.

By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!

Were you the doctor and I knew you not?

Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.

When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

