


My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,

We two will leave you. But at dinner time

I pray you have in mind where we must meet.

Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.

I must be one of these same dumb wise men,

For Gratiano never lets me speak.

Nay, we will slink away in supper time,

Disguise us at my lodging, and return

All in an hour.

’Tis now but four o’clock. We have two hours

To furnish us.    Friend Lancelet, what’s the news?

I know the hand; in faith, ’tis a fair hand,

And whiter than the paper it writ on

Is the fair hand that writ.

Whither goest thou?

Hold here, take this. Tell gentle Jessica

I will not fail her. Speak it privately.

Go, gentlemen,

Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?

I am provided of a torchbearer.

Meet me and Gratiano

At Gratiano’s lodging some hour hence.

I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed

How I shall take her from her father’s house,

What gold and jewels she is furnished with,

What page’s suit she hath in readiness.

If e’er the Jew her father come to heaven,

It will be for his gentle daughter’s sake;

And never dare misfortune cross her foot

Unless she do it under this excuse,

That she is issue to a faithless Jew.

Come, go with me. Peruse this as thou goest;

Fair Jessica shall be my torchbearer.

Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode.

Not I but my affairs have made you wait.

When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,

I’ll watch as long for you then. Approach.

Here dwells my father Jew.—Ho! Who’s within?

Lorenzo, and thy love.

Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.

Descend, for you must be my torchbearer.

So are you, sweet,

Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.

But come at once,

For the close night doth play the runaway,

And we are stayed for at Bassanio’s feast.

Beshrew me but I love her heartily,

For she is wise, if I can judge of her,

And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,

And true she is, as she hath proved herself.

And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,

Shall she be placèd in my constant soul.

What, art thou come? On, gentleman, away!

Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.

I thank your Honor. For my part, my lord,

My purpose was not to have seen you here,

But meeting with Salerio by the way,

He did entreat me past all saying nay

To come with him along.

Madam, although I speak it in your presence,

You have a noble and a true conceit

Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly

In bearing thus the absence of your lord.

But if you knew to whom you show this honor,

How true a gentleman you send relief,

How dear a lover of my lord your husband,

I know you would be prouder of the work

Than customary bounty can enforce you.

Madam, with all my heart.

I shall obey you in all fair commands.

Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!

I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Lancelet,

if you thus get my wife into corners!

I shall answer that better to the commonwealth

than you can the getting up of the Negro’s

belly! The Moor is with child by you, Lancelet.

How every fool can play upon the word! I

think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into

silence, and discourse grow commendable in none

only but parrots. Go in, sirrah, bid them prepare for

dinner.

Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you!

Then bid them prepare dinner.

Will you cover, then, sir?

Yet more quarreling with occasion! Wilt

thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an

instant? I pray thee understand a plain man in his

plain meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover the

table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to

dinner.

O dear discretion, how his words are suited!

The fool hath planted in his memory

An army of good words, and I do know

A many fools that stand in better place,

Garnished like him, that for a tricksy word

Defy the matter. How cheer’st thou, Jessica?

And now, good sweet, say thy opinion

How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio’s wife?

Even such a husband

Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.

I will anon. First let us go to dinner.

No, pray thee, let it serve for table talk.

Then howsome’er thou speak’st, ’mong other things

I shall digest it.

The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,

When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees

And they did make no noise, in such a night

Troilus, methinks, mounted the Trojan walls

And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents

Where Cressid lay that night.

In such a night

Stood Dido with a willow in her hand

Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love

To come again to Carthage.

In such a night

Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,

And with an unthrift love did run from Venice

As far as Belmont.

In such a night

Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,

Slander her love, and he forgave it her.

Who comes so fast in silence of the night?

A friend? What friend? Your name, I pray you, friend.

Who comes with her?

He is not, nor we have not heard from him.—

But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,

And ceremoniously let us prepare

Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

Who calls?

Leave holloaing, man! Here.

Here!

Let’s in, and there expect their coming.

And yet no matter; why should we go in?—

My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,

Within the house, your mistress is at hand,

And bring your music forth into the air.

How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank.

Here will we sit and let the sounds of music

Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night

Become the touches of sweet harmony.

Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven

Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold.

There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st

But in his motion like an angel sings,

Still choiring to the young-eyed cherubins.

Such harmony is in immortal souls,

But whilst this muddy vesture of decay

Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.

Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn.

With sweetest touches pierce your mistress’ ear,

And draw her home with music.

The reason is, your spirits are attentive.

For do but note a wild and wanton herd

Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,

Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,

Which is the hot condition of their blood,

If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,

Or any air of music touch their ears,

You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,

Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze

By the sweet power of music. Therefore the poet

Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods,

Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage,

But music for the time doth change his nature.

The man that hath no music in himself,

Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,

Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;

The motions of his spirit are dull as night,

And his affections dark as Erebus.

Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.

That is the voice,

Or I am much deceived, of Portia.

Dear lady, welcome home.

Madam, they are not yet,

But there is come a messenger before

To signify their coming.

Your husband is at hand. I hear his trumpet.

We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.

Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way

Of starvèd people.

