


Certainly my conscience will serve me to

run from this Jew my master. The fiend is at mine

elbow and tempts me, saying to me “Gobbo,

Lancelet Gobbo, good Lancelet,” or “good Gobbo,”

or “good Lancelet Gobbo, use your legs, take

the start, run away.” My conscience says “No. Take

heed, honest Lancelet, take heed, honest Gobbo,”

or, as aforesaid, “honest Lancelet Gobbo, do not

run; scorn running with thy heels.” Well, the most

courageous fiend bids me pack. “Fia!” says the

fiend. “Away!” says the fiend. “For the heavens,

rouse up a brave mind,” says the fiend, “and run!”

Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my

heart, says very wisely to me “My honest friend

Lancelet, being an honest man’s son”—or rather,

an honest woman’s son, for indeed my father did

something smack, something grow to—he had a

kind of taste—well, my conscience says “Lancelet,

budge not.” “Budge,” says the fiend. “Budge not,”

says my conscience. “Conscience,” say I, “you

counsel well.” “Fiend,” say I, “you counsel well.”

To be ruled by my conscience, I should stay with the

Jew my master, who (God bless the mark) is a kind

of devil; and to run away from the Jew, I should be

ruled by the fiend, who (saving your reverence) is

the devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil

incarnation, and, in my conscience, my conscience

is but a kind of hard conscience to offer to counsel

me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more

friendly counsel. I will run, fiend. My heels are at

your commandment. I will run.

O heavens, this is my true begotten

father, who being more than sandblind, high gravelblind,

knows me not. I will try confusions with him.

Turn up on your right hand at the next

turning, but at the next turning of all on your left;

marry, at the very next turning, turn of no hand,

but turn down indirectly to the Jew’s house.

Talk you of young Master Lancelet?

Mark me now, now will I raise the waters.—Talk

you of young Master Lancelet?

Well, let his father be what he will, we talk

of young Master Lancelet.

But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech

you, talk you of young Master Lancelet?

Ergo, Master Lancelet. Talk not of Master

Lancelet, father, for the young gentleman, according

to Fates and Destinies, and such odd sayings, the

Sisters Three, and such branches of learning, is

indeed deceased, or, as you would say in plain

terms, gone to heaven.

Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post,

a staff or a prop?—Do you know me, father?

Do you not know me, father?

Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might

fail of the knowing me. It is a wise father that

knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you

news of your son. Give me your blessing.

Truth will come to light, murder cannot be hid

long—a man’s son may, but in the end, truth will

out.

Pray you, let’s have no more fooling about

it, but give me your blessing. I am Lancelet, your

boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall

be.

I know not what I shall think of that; but I

am Lancelet, the Jew’s man, and I am sure Margery

your wife is my mother.

It should seem, then, that

Dobbin’s tail grows backward. I am sure he had

more hair of his tail than I have of my face when I

last saw him.

Well, well. But for mine own part, as I have

set up my rest to run away, so I will not rest till I

have run some ground. My master’s a very Jew.

Give him a present! Give him a halter. I am

famished in his service. You may tell every finger I

have with my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come!

Give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who

indeed gives rare new liveries. If I serve not him, I

will run as far as God has any ground. O rare

fortune, here comes the man! To him, father, for I

am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer.

To him, father.

Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew’s man,

that would, sir, as my father shall specify—

Indeed, the short and the long is, I serve the

Jew, and have a desire, as my father shall specify—

To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew,

having done me wrong, doth cause me, as my

father being, I hope, an old man, shall frutify unto

you—

In very brief, the suit is impertinent to

myself, as your Worship shall know by this honest

old man, and though I say it, though old man yet

poor man, my father—

Serve you, sir.

The old proverb is very well parted between

my master Shylock and you, sir: you have “the

grace of God,” sir, and he hath “enough.”

Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have

ne’er a tongue in my head! Well,

if any man in Italy have a fairer table which doth

offer to swear upon a book—I shall have good

fortune, go to! Here’s a simple line of life. Here’s a

small trifle of wives—alas, fifteen wives is nothing;

eleven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in

for one man—and then to ’scape drowning

thrice, and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a

featherbed! Here are simple ’scapes. Well, if Fortune

be a woman, she’s a good wench for this gear.

Father, come. I’ll take my leave of the Jew in the

twinkling.

Adieu. Tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful

pagan, most sweet Jew. If a Christian do not

play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived.

But adieu. These foolish drops do something drown

my manly spirit. Adieu.

An it shall please you to break up this, it

shall seem to signify.

By your leave, sir.

Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to

sup tonight with my new master the Christian.

Why, Jessica!

Your Worship was wont to tell me I could

do nothing without bidding.

I beseech you, sir, go. My young master

doth expect your reproach.

And they have conspired together—I will

not say you shall see a masque, but if you do, then it

was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on

Black Monday last, at six o’clock i’ th’ morning,

falling out that year on Ash Wednesday was four

year in th’ afternoon.

I will go before, sir. Mistress,

look out at window for all this.

There will come a Christian by

Will be worth a Jewess’ eye.

Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father

are to be laid upon the children. Therefore I

promise you I fear you. I was always plain with you,

and so now I speak my agitation of the matter.

Therefore be o’ good cheer, for truly I think you

are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do

you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope

neither.

Marry, you may partly hope that your father

got you not, that you are not the Jew’s daughter.

Truly, then, I fear you are damned both by

father and mother; thus when I shun Scylla your

father, I fall into Charybdis your mother. Well, you

are gone both ways.

Truly the more to blame he! We were Christians

enow before, e’en as many as could well live

one by another. This making of Christians will

raise the price of hogs. If we grow all to be pork

eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the

coals for money.

It is much that the Moor should be more

than reason; but if she be less than an honest

woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.

That is done, sir. They have all stomachs.

That is done too, sir, only “cover” is the

word.

Not so, sir, neither! I know my duty.

For the table, sir, it shall be served in; for

the meat, sir, it shall be covered; for your coming in

to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humors and conceits

shall govern.

Sola, sola! Wo ha, ho! Sola, sola!

Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master

Lorenzo, sola, sola!

Sola! Where, where?

Tell him there’s a post come from my master

with his horn full of good news. My master will

be here ere morning, sweet soul.

