


By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary

of this great world.

Good sentences, and well pronounced.

If to do were as easy as to know what were

good to do, chapels had been churches, and poor

men’s cottages princes’ palaces. It is a good divine

that follows his own instructions. I can easier teach

twenty what were good to be done than to be one of

the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain

may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper

leaps o’er a cold decree: such a hare is madness the

youth, to skip o’er the meshes of good counsel the

cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to

choose me a husband. O, me, the word “choose”! I

may neither choose who I would nor refuse who I

dislike. So is the will of a living daughter curbed by

the will of a dead father. Is it not hard, Nerissa, that

I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?

I pray thee, overname them, and as thou

namest them, I will describe them, and according

to my description level at my affection.

Ay, that’s a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but

talk of his horse, and he makes it a great appropriation

to his own good parts that he can shoe him

himself. I am much afeard my lady his mother

played false with a smith.

He doth nothing but frown, as who should say

“An you will not have me, choose.” He hears

merry tales and smiles not. I fear he will prove the

weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so

full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had

rather be married to a death’s-head with a bone in

his mouth than to either of these. God defend me

from these two!

God made him, and therefore let him pass for

a man. In truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker,

but he!—why, he hath a horse better than the

Neapolitan’s, a better bad habit of frowning than

the Count Palatine. He is every man in no man. If a

throstle sing, he falls straight a-cap’ring. He will

fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I

should marry twenty husbands! If he would despise

me, I would forgive him, for if he love me to

madness, I shall never requite him.

You know I say nothing to him, for he understands

not me, nor I him. He hath neither Latin,

French, nor Italian; and you will come into the

court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in

the English. He is a proper man’s picture, but alas,

who can converse with a dumb show? How oddly

he is suited! I think he bought his doublet in Italy,

his round hose in France, his bonnet in Germany,

and his behavior everywhere.

That he hath a neighborly charity in him, for

he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman,

and swore he would pay him again when he was

able. I think the Frenchman became his surety and

sealed under for another.

Very vilely in the morning, when he is sober,

and most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk.

When he is best he is a little worse than a man, and

when he is worst he is little better than a beast. An

the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift

to go without him.

Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set

a deep glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary

casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation

without, I know he will choose it. I will do

anything, Nerissa, ere I will be married to a sponge.

If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as

chaste as Diana unless I be obtained by the manner

of my father’s will. I am glad this parcel of wooers

are so reasonable, for there is not one among them

but I dote on his very absence. And I pray God

grant them a fair departure!

Yes, yes, it was Bassanio—as I think so was he

called.

I remember him well, and I remember him

worthy of thy praise.

How now, what news?

If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good

heart as I can bid the other four farewell, I should

be glad of his approach. If he have the condition of

a saint and the complexion of a devil, I had rather

he should shrive me than wive me.

Come, Nerissa. Sirrah, go before.—

Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another knocks at the door.

In terms of choice I am not solely led

By nice direction of a maiden’s eyes;

Besides, the lott’ry of my destiny

Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.

But if my father had not scanted me

And hedged me by his wit to yield myself

His wife who wins me by that means I told you,

Yourself, renownèd prince, then stood as fair

As any comer I have looked on yet

For my affection.

You must take your chance

And either not attempt to choose at all

Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong

Never to speak to lady afterward

In way of marriage. Therefore be advised.

First, forward to the temple. After dinner

Your hazard shall be made.

Go, draw aside the curtains and discover

The several caskets to this noble prince.

Now make your choice.

The one of them contains my picture, prince.

If you choose that, then I am yours withal.

There, take it, prince. And if my form lie there,

Then I am yours.

A gentle riddance! Draw the curtains, go.

Let all of his complexion choose me so.

Behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince.

If you choose that wherein I am contained,

Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized.

But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,

You must be gone from hence immediately.

To these injunctions everyone doth swear

That comes to hazard for my worthless self.

Too long a pause for that which you find there.

To offend and judge are distinct offices

And of opposèd natures.

Thus hath the candle singed the moth.

O, these deliberate fools, when they do choose,

They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.

Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.

Here. What would my lord?

No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard

Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,

Thou spend’st such high-day wit in praising him!

Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see

Quick Cupid’s post that comes so mannerly.

I pray you tarry, pause a day or two

Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong

I lose your company; therefore forbear a while.

There’s something tells me (but it is not love)

I would not lose you, and you know yourself

Hate counsels not in such a quality.

But lest you should not understand me well

(And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought)

I would detain you here some month or two

Before you venture for me. I could teach you

How to choose right, but then I am forsworn.

So will I never be. So may you miss me.

But if you do, you’ll make me wish a sin,

That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,

They have o’erlooked me and divided me.

One half of me is yours, the other half yours—

Mine own, I would say—but if mine, then yours,

And so all yours. O, these naughty times

Puts bars between the owners and their rights!

And so though yours, not yours. Prove it so,

Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.

I speak too long, but ’tis to peize the time,

To eche it, and to draw it out in length,

To stay you from election.

Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess

What treason there is mingled with your love.

Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack

Where men enforcèd do speak anything.

Well, then, confess and live.

Away, then. I am locked in one of them.

If you do love me, you will find me out.—

Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof.

Let music sound while he doth make his choice.

Then if he lose he makes a swanlike end,

Fading in music. That the comparison

May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream

And wat’ry deathbed for him. He may win,

And what is music then? Then music is

Even as the flourish when true subjects bow

To a new-crownèd monarch. Such it is

As are those dulcet sounds in break of day

That creep into the dreaming bridegroom’s ear

And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,

With no less presence but with much more love

Than young Alcides when he did redeem

The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy

To the sea-monster. I stand for sacrifice;

The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,

With blearèd visages, come forth to view

The issue of th’ exploit. Go, Hercules!

Live thou, I live. With much much more dismay

I view the fight than thou that mak’st the fray.

How all the other passions fleet to air,

As doubtful thoughts and rash embraced despair,

And shudd’ring fear, and green-eyed jealousy!

O love, be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,

In measure rain thy joy, scant this excess!

I feel too much thy blessing. Make it less,

For fear I surfeit.

You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,

Such as I am. Though for myself alone

I would not be ambitious in my wish

To wish myself much better, yet for you

I would be trebled twenty times myself,

A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times

More rich, that only to stand high in your account

I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,

Exceed account. But the full sum of me

Is sum of something, which, to term in gross,

Is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticed;

Happy in this, she is not yet so old

But she may learn; happier than this,

She is not bred so dull but she can learn;

Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit

Commits itself to yours to be directed

As from her lord, her governor, her king.

Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours

Is now converted. But now I was the lord

Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,

Queen o’er myself; and even now, but now,

This house, these servants, and this same myself

Are yours, my lord’s. I give them with this ring,

Which, when you part from, lose, or give away,

Let it presage the ruin of your love,

And be my vantage to exclaim on you.

Is this true, Nerissa?

So do I, my lord. They are entirely welcome.

There are some shrewd contents in yond same paper

That steals the color from Bassanio’s cheek.

Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world

Could turn so much the constitution

Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?—

With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself,

And I must freely have the half of anything

That this same paper brings you.

Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?

What sum owes he the Jew?

What, no more?

Pay him six thousand and deface the bond.

Double six thousand and then treble that,

Before a friend of this description

Shall lose a hair through Bassanio’s fault.

First go with me to church and call me wife,

And then away to Venice to your friend!

For never shall you lie by Portia’s side

With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold

To pay the petty debt twenty times over.

When it is paid, bring your true friend along.

My maid Nerissa and myself meantime

Will live as maids and widows. Come, away,

For you shall hence upon your wedding day.

Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;

Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.

But let me hear the letter of your friend.

O love, dispatch all business and begone!

I never did repent for doing good,

Nor shall not now; for in companions

That do converse and waste the time together,

Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,

There must be needs a like proportion

Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit;

Which makes me think that this Antonio,

Being the bosom lover of my lord,

Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,

How little is the cost I have bestowed

In purchasing the semblance of my soul

From out the state of hellish cruelty!

This comes too near the praising of myself;

Therefore no more of it. Hear other things:

Lorenzo, I commit into your hands

The husbandry and manage of my house

Until my lord’s return. For mine own part,

I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow

To live in prayer and contemplation,

Only attended by Nerissa here,

Until her husband and my lord’s return.

There is a monastery two miles off,

And there we will abide. I do desire you

Not to deny this imposition,

The which my love and some necessity

Now lays upon you.

My people do already know my mind

And will acknowledge you and Jessica

In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.

So fare you well till we shall meet again.

I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased

To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.

Now, Balthazar,

As I have ever found thee honest true,

So let me find thee still: take this same letter,

And use thou all th’ endeavor of a man

In speed to Padua. See thou render this

Into my cousin’s hands, Doctor Bellario.

And look what notes and garments he doth give thee,

Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed

Unto the traject, to the common ferry

Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,

But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.

Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand

That you yet know not of. We’ll see our husbands

Before they think of us.

They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit

That they shall think we are accomplishèd

With that we lack. I’ll hold thee any wager,

When we are both accoutered like young men,

I’ll prove the prettier fellow of the two,

And wear my dagger with the braver grace,

And speak between the change of man and boy

With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps

Into a manly stride, and speak of frays

Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies

How honorable ladies sought my love,

Which I denying, they fell sick and died—

I could not do withal!—then I’ll repent,

And wish, for all that, that I had not killed them.

And twenty of these puny lies I’ll tell,

That men shall swear I have discontinued school

Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind

A thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks

Which I will practice.

Fie, what a question’s that,

If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!

But come, I’ll tell thee all my whole device

When I am in my coach, which stays for us

At the park gate; and therefore haste away,

For we must measure twenty miles today.

I did, my lord.

I am informèd throughly of the cause.

Which is the merchant here? And which the Jew?

Is your name Shylock?

Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,

Yet in such rule that the Venetian law

Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.

You stand within his danger, do you not?

Do you confess the bond?

Then must the Jew be merciful.

The quality of mercy is not strained.

It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven

Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest:

It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.

’Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes

The thronèd monarch better than his crown.

His scepter shows the force of temporal power,

The attribute to awe and majesty

Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;

But mercy is above this sceptered sway.

It is enthronèd in the hearts of kings;

It is an attribute to God Himself;

And earthly power doth then show likest God’s

When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,

Though justice be thy plea, consider this:

That in the course of justice none of us

Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,

And that same prayer doth teach us all to render

The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much

To mitigate the justice of thy plea,

Which, if thou follow, this strict court of Venice

Must needs give sentence ’gainst the merchant there.

Is he not able to discharge the money?

It must not be. There is no power in Venice

Can alter a decree establishèd;

’Twill be recorded for a precedent

And many an error by the same example

Will rush into the state. It cannot be.

I pray you let me look upon the bond.

Shylock, there’s thrice thy money offered thee.

Why, this bond is forfeit,

And lawfully by this the Jew may claim

A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off

Nearest the merchant’s heart.—Be merciful;

Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.

Why, then, thus it is:

You must prepare your bosom for his knife—

For the intent and purpose of the law

Hath full relation to the penalty,

Which here appeareth due upon the bond.

Therefore lay bare your bosom—

It is so.

Are there balance here to weigh the flesh?

Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,

To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.

It is not so expressed, but what of that?

’Twere good you do so much for charity.

You, merchant, have you anything to say?

Your wife would give you little thanks for that

If she were by to hear you make the offer.

A pound of that same merchant’s flesh is thine:

The court awards it, and the law doth give it.

And you must cut this flesh from off his breast:

The law allows it, and the court awards it.

Tarry a little. There is something else.

This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood.

The words expressly are “a pound of flesh.”

Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,

But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed

One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods

Are by the laws of Venice confiscate

Unto the state of Venice.

Thyself shalt see the act.

For, as thou urgest justice, be assured

Thou shalt have justice more than thou desir’st.

Soft! The Jew shall have all justice. Soft, no haste!

He shall have nothing but the penalty.

Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.

Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more

But just a pound of flesh. If thou tak’st more

Or less than a just pound, be it but so much

As makes it light or heavy in the substance

Or the division of the twentieth part

Of one poor scruple—nay, if the scale do turn

But in the estimation of a hair,

Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.

Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.

He hath refused it in the open court.

He shall have merely justice and his bond.

Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture

To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.

Tarry, Jew.

The law hath yet another hold on you.

It is enacted in the laws of Venice,

If it be proved against an alien

That by direct or indirect attempts

He seek the life of any citizen,

The party ’gainst the which he doth contrive

Shall seize one half his goods; the other half

Comes to the privy coffer of the state,

And the offender’s life lies in the mercy

Of the Duke only, ’gainst all other voice.

In which predicament I say thou stand’st,

For it appears by manifest proceeding

That indirectly, and directly too,

Thou hast contrived against the very life

Of the defendant, and thou hast incurred

The danger formerly by me rehearsed.

Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.

What mercy can you render him, Antonio?

Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?

Clerk, draw a deed of gift.

I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon.

I must away this night toward Padua,

And it is meet I presently set forth.

He is well paid that is well satisfied,

And I, delivering you, am satisfied,

And therein do account myself well paid.

My mind was never yet more mercenary.

I pray you know me when we meet again.

I wish you well, and so I take my leave.

You press me far, and therefore I will yield.

Give me your gloves; I’ll wear them for your sake—

And for your love I’ll take this ring from you.

Do not draw back your hand; I’ll take no more,

And you in love shall not deny me this.

I will have nothing else but only this.

And now methinks I have a mind to it.

I see, sir, you are liberal in offers.

You taught me first to beg, and now methinks

You teach me how a beggar should be answered.

That ’scuse serves many men to save their gifts.

And if your wife be not a madwoman,

And know how well I have deserved this ring,

She would not hold out enemy forever

For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you.

Inquire the Jew’s house out; give him this deed

And let him sign it. We’ll away tonight,

And be a day before our husbands home.

This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

That cannot be.

His ring I do accept most thankfully,

And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore,

I pray you show my youth old Shylock’s house.

Thou mayst, I warrant! We shall have old swearing

That they did give the rings away to men;

But we’ll outface them, and outswear them, too.—

Away, make haste! Thou know’st where I will tarry.

That light we see is burning in my hall.

How far that little candle throws his beams!

So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

So doth the greater glory dim the less.

A substitute shines brightly as a king

Until a king be by, and then his state

Empties itself as doth an inland brook

Into the main of waters. Music, hark!

Nothing is good, I see, without respect.

Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.

The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark

When neither is attended, and I think

The nightingale, if she should sing by day

When every goose is cackling, would be thought

No better a musician than the wren.

How many things by season seasoned are

To their right praise and true perfection!

Peace—how the moon sleeps with Endymion

And would not be awaked!

He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,

By the bad voice.

We have been praying for our husbands’ welfare,

Which speed we hope the better for our words.

Are they returned?

Go in, Nerissa.

Give order to my servants that they take

No note at all of our being absent hence—

Nor you, Lorenzo—Jessica, nor you.

This night methinks is but the daylight sick;

It looks a little paler. ’Tis a day

Such as the day is when the sun is hid.

Let me give light, but let me not be light,

For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,

And never be Bassanio so for me.

But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.

You should in all sense be much bound to him,

For as I hear he was much bound for you.

Sir, you are very welcome to our house.

It must appear in other ways than words;

Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

A quarrel ho, already! What’s the matter?

You were to blame, I must be plain with you,

To part so slightly with your wife’s first gift,

A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,

And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.

I gave my love a ring and made him swear

Never to part with it, and here he stands.

I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it

Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth

That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,

You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief.

An ’twere to me I should be mad at it.

What ring gave you, my lord?

Not that, I hope, which you received of me.

Even so void is your false heart of truth.

By heaven, I will ne’er come in your bed

Until I see the ring!

If you had known the virtue of the ring,

Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,

Or your own honor to contain the ring,

You would not then have parted with the ring.

What man is there so much unreasonable,

If you had pleased to have defended it

With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty

To urge the thing held as a ceremony?

Nerissa teaches me what to believe:

I’ll die for ’t but some woman had the ring!

Let not that doctor e’er come near my house!

Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,

And that which you did swear to keep for me,

I will become as liberal as you:

I’ll not deny him anything I have,

No, not my body, nor my husband’s bed.

Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.

Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argus.

If you do not, if I be left alone,

Now by mine honor, which is yet mine own,

I’ll have that doctor for my bedfellow.

Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome notwithstanding.

Mark you but that!

In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,

In each eye one. Swear by your double self,

And there’s an oath of credit.

Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,

And bid him keep it better than the other.

I had it of him. Pardon me, Bassanio,

For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.

Speak not so grossly.—You are all amazed.

Here is a letter; read it at your leisure.

It comes from Padua from Bellario.

There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,

Nerissa there, her clerk. Lorenzo here

Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,

And even but now returned. I have not yet

Entered my house.—Antonio, you are welcome,

And I have better news in store for you

Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon.

There you shall find three of your argosies

Are richly come to harbor suddenly.

You shall not know by what strange accident

I chancèd on this letter.

How now, Lorenzo?

My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.

It is almost morning,

And yet I am sure you are not satisfied

Of these events at full. Let us go in,

And charge us there upon inter’gatories,

And we will answer all things faithfully.

