


We were never so much out of creatures. We

have but poor three, and they can do no more than

they can do; and they with continual action are

even as good as rotten.

Thou sayst true. ’Tis not our bringing up of poor

bastards—as I think I have brought up some

eleven—

What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong

wind will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully

sodden.

Why to give over, I pray you? Is it a shame to get

when we are old?

Come, other sorts offend as well as we.

Bolt, has she any qualities?

What’s her price, Bolt?

Bolt, take you the marks of her: the color of her

hair, complexion, height, her age, with warrant of

her virginity, and cry “He that will give most shall

have her first.” Such a maidenhead were no cheap

thing, if men were as they have been. Get this done

as I command you.

Why lament you, pretty one?

Come, the gods have done their part in you.

You are light into my hands, where you are like

to live.

Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.

Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of all

fashions. You shall fare well; you shall have the

difference of all complexions. What, do you stop

your ears?

What would you have me be, an I be not a

woman?

Marry, whip the gosling! I think I shall have

something to do with you. Come, you’re a young

foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would

have you.

If it please the gods to defend you by men, then

men must comfort you, men must feed you, men

stir you up. Bolt’s returned.

Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?

And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the inclination

of the people, especially of the younger

sort?

We shall have him here tomorrow with his best

ruff on.

Who? Monsieur Verolles?

Well, well, as for him, he brought his disease

hither; here he does but repair it. I know he will

come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the

sun.

Pray you, come hither awhile. You

have fortunes coming upon you. Mark me: you

must seem to do that fearfully which you commit

willingly, despise profit where you have most gain.

To weep that you live as you do makes pity in your

lovers. Seldom but that pity begets you a good

opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.

Thou sayst true, i’ faith, so they must, for your

bride goes to that with shame which is her way to

go with warrant.

Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.

Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like

the manner of your garments well.

Bolt, spend thou that in the town.

Report what a sojourner we have. You’ll

lose nothing by custom. When Nature framed this

piece, she meant thee a good turn. Therefore say

what a paragon she is, and thou hast the harvest

out of thine own report.

Come your ways. Follow me.

What have we to do with Diana, pray you? Will

you go with us?

Fie, fie upon her! She’s able to freeze the god

Priapus and undo a whole generation. We must

either get her ravished or be rid of her. When she

should do for clients her fitment and do me the

kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks,

her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her

knees, that she would make a puritan of the devil if

he should cheapen a kiss of her.

Faith, there’s no way to be rid on ’t but by the

way to the pox.

Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.

Now the gods to-bless your Honor!

We have here one, sir, if she would—but there

never came her like in Mytilene.

Your Honor knows what ’tis to say, well enough.

Here comes that which grows to the stalk, never

plucked yet, I can assure you. Is she not a fair

creature?

I beseech your Honor, give me leave a word, and

I’ll have done presently.

First, I would have you note this is

an honorable man.

Next, he’s the governor of this country and a

man whom I am bound to.

Pray you, without any more virginal fencing,

will you use him kindly? He will line your apron

with gold.

My lord, she’s not paced yet. You must take some

pains to work her to your manage.—Come, we will

leave his Honor and her together. Go thy ways.

How now, what’s the matter?

O, abominable!

Marry, hang her up forever.

Bolt, take her away, use her at thy pleasure,

crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest

malleable.

She conjures. Away with her! Would she had

never come within my doors.—Marry, hang you!—

She’s born to undo us.—Will you not go the way of

womenkind? Marry come up, my dish of chastity

with rosemary and bays!

