


Sir?

Ay, to eleven, and brought them down again. But

shall I search the market?

Ay, she quickly pooped him. She made him

roast-meat for worms. But I’ll go search the

market.

Come your ways, my masters. You say she’s a

virgin?

Master, I have gone through for this piece you

see. If you like her, so; if not, I have lost my

earnest.

She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellent

good clothes. There’s no farther necessity of

qualities can make her be refused.

I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces.

Performance shall follow.

I have cried her almost to the number of her

hairs. I have drawn her picture with my voice.

Faith, they listened to me as they would have

hearkened to their father’s testament. There was a

Spaniard’s mouth watered an he went to bed to her

very description.

Tonight, tonight! But, mistress, do you know the

French knight that cowers i’ the hams?

Ay, he. He offered to cut a caper at the proclamation,

but he made a groan at it and swore he would

see her tomorrow.

Well, if we had of every nation a traveler, we

should lodge them with this sign.

O, take her home, mistress, take her home!

These blushes of hers must be quenched with

some present practice.

Faith, some do and some do not. But, mistress,

if I have bargained for the joint—

I may so.

Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.

I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so

awake the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty

stirs up the lewdly inclined. I’ll bring home some

tonight.

Faith, I must ravish her, or she’ll disfurnish us of

all our cavalleria, and make our swearers priests.

We should have both lord and lown, if the peevish

baggage would but give way to customers.

I am glad to see your Honor in good health.

For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shall

see a rose; and she were a rose indeed, if she had

but—

O, sir, I can be modest.

I beseech your Honor, one piece

for me.

How’s this? We must take another course with

you! If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a

breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope,

shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded

like a spaniel. Come your ways.

I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the

common hangman shall execute it. Come your

way. We’ll have no more gentlemen driven away.

Come your ways, I say.

Worse and worse, mistress. She has here spoken

holy words to the Lord Lysimachus!

He makes our profession as it were to stink afore

the face of the gods.

The nobleman would have dealt with her like a

nobleman, and she sent him away as cold as a

snowball, saying his prayers too.

An if she were a thornier piece of ground than

she is, she shall be plowed.

Come, mistress, come your way with me.

To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.

Come, now, your one thing.

Why, I could wish him to be my master, or

rather, my mistress.

What would you have me do? Go to the wars,

would you, where a man may serve seven years for

the loss of a leg, and have not money enough in the

end to buy him a wooden one?

But can you teach all this you speak of?

Well, I will see what I can do for thee. If I can

place thee, I will.

Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them.

But since my master and mistress hath bought

you, there’s no going but by their consent. Therefore

I will make them acquainted with your

purpose, and I doubt not but I shall find them

tractable enough. Come, I’ll do for thee what I can.

Come your ways.

