


How now! How a

dozen of virginities?

You may so. ’Tis the better for you that

your resorters stand upon sound legs. How now?

Wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal

withal and defy the surgeon?

If she’d do the deeds of darkness, thou

wouldst say?

Well, call forth, call forth.

What, prithee?

That dignifies the renown of a bawd no

less than it gives a good report to a number to be

chaste.

Faith, she would serve after a long voyage

at sea. Well, there’s for you.

Leave us.

I beseech you, do.

Ha’ you done?

Now, pretty one, how long have you been

at this trade?

Why, I cannot name ’t but I shall offend.

How long have you been of this profession?

Did you go to ’t so young? Were you a

gamester at five or at seven?

Why, the house you dwell in proclaims

you to be a creature of sale.

Why, hath your principal made known

unto you who I am?

Why, your herbwoman, she that sets

seeds and roots of shame and iniquity. O, you have

heard something of my power, and so stand aloof

for more serious wooing. But I protest to thee,

pretty one, my authority shall not see thee, or else

look friendly upon thee. Come, bring me to some

private place. Come, come.

How’s this? How’s this? Some more. Be sage.

I did not think

Thou couldst have spoke so well, ne’er dreamt thou couldst.

Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,

Thy speech had altered it. Hold, here’s gold for thee.

Persevere in that clear way thou goest

And the gods strengthen thee!

For me, be you thoughten

That I came with no ill intent, for to me

The very doors and windows savor vilely.

Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue,

And I doubt not but thy training hath been noble.

Hold, here’s more gold for thee.

A curse upon him, die he like a thief,

That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost

Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.

Avaunt, thou damnèd doorkeeper!

Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,

Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!

 Hail, reverend sir. The gods preserve you.

You wish me well.

Being on shore, honoring of Neptune’s triumphs,

Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,

I made to it to know of whence you are.

I am the governor of this place you lie before.

Upon what ground is his distemperature?

May we not see him?

Yet let me obtain my wish.

Sir king, all hail! The gods preserve you. Hail,

Royal sir!

’Tis well bethought.

She, questionless, with her sweet harmony

And other chosen attractions, would allure

And make a batt’ry through his defended ports,

Which now are midway stopped.

She is all happy as the fairest of all,

And, with her fellow maid, is now upon

The leafy shelter that abuts against

The island’s side.

O, sir, a courtesy

Which, if we should deny, the most just God

For every graft would send a caterpillar,

And so inflict our province. Yet once more

Let me entreat to know at large the cause

Of your king’s sorrow.

O, here’s the lady that I sent for.—

Welcome, fair one.—Is ’t not a goodly presence?

She’s such a one that, were I well assured

Came of a gentle kind and noble stock,

I’d wish no better choice, and think me rarely wed.—

Fair one, all goodness that consists in beauty:

Expect even here, where is a kingly patient,

If that thy prosperous and artificial feat

Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,

Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay

As thy desires can wish.

Come, let us

Leave her, and the gods make her prosperous.

Marked he your music?

See, she will speak to him.

She never would tell

Her parentage. Being demanded that,

She would sit still and weep.

It is not good to cross him. Give him way.

Music, my lord? I hear—

A pillow for his head. So, leave him all.

Well, my companion friends, if this but answer

To my just belief, I’ll well remember you.

Sir,

With all my heart. And when you come ashore,

I have another suit.

Sir, lend me your arm.

