


Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.

They do abuse the King that flatter him,

For flattery is the bellows blows up sin;

The thing the which is flattered, but a spark

To which that wind gives heat and stronger glowing;

Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,

Fits kings as they are men, for they may err.

When Signior Sooth here does proclaim peace,

He flatters you, makes war upon your life.

Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please.

I cannot be much lower than my knees.

An angry brow, dread lord.

How dares the plants look up to heaven,

From whence they have their nourishment?

I have ground the ax myself;

Do but you strike the blow.

To bear with patience such griefs

As you yourself do lay upon yourself.

Alas, sir!

Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak,

Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear,

And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant,

Who either by public war or private treason

Will take away your life.

Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while,

Till that his rage and anger be forgot,

Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life.

Your rule direct to any. If to me,

Day serves not light more faithful than I’ll be.

We’ll mingle our bloods together in the earth,

From whence we had our being and our birth.

You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre,

Further to question me of your king’s departure.

His sealed commission left in trust with me

Does speak sufficiently he’s gone to travel.

If further yet you will be satisfied

Why, as it were, unlicensed of your loves

He would depart, I’ll give some light unto you.

Being at Antioch—

Royal Antiochus, on what cause I know not,

Took some displeasure at him—at least he judged so;

And doubting lest he had erred or sinned,

To show his sorrow, he’d correct himself;

So puts himself unto the shipman’s toil,

With whom each minute threatens life or death.

Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.

We have no reason to desire it,

Commended to our master, not to us.

Yet ere you shall depart, this we desire:

As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre.

No, Escanes, know this of me:

Antiochus from incest lived not free,

For which the most high gods not minding longer

To withhold the vengeance that they had in store

Due to this heinous capital offense,

Even in the height and pride of all his glory,

When he was seated in a chariot of

An inestimable value, and his daughter with him,

A fire from heaven came and shriveled up

Those bodies even to loathing, for they so stunk

That all those eyes adored them, ere their fall,

Scorn now their hand should give them burial.

And yet but justice; for though this king were great,

His greatness was no guard to bar heaven’s shaft,

But sin had his reward.

With me? And welcome. Happy day, my lords.

Your griefs? For what? Wrong not your prince you love.

Try honor’s cause; forbear your suffrages.

If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.

Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,

Where’s hourly trouble for a minute’s ease.

A twelve-month longer let me entreat you

To forbear the absence of your king;

If in which time expired, he not return,

I shall with agèd patience bear your yoke.

But if I cannot win you to this love,

Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,

And in your search spend your adventurous worth,

Whom if you find and win unto return,

You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.

Then you love us, we you, and we’ll clasp hands.

When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.

That he have his. Call up some gentlemen.

Gentlemen,

There is some of worth would come aboard.

I pray, greet him fairly.

And you, to outlive the age I am,

And die as I would do.

First, what is your place?

Sir,

Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the King,

A man who for this three months hath not spoken

To anyone, nor taken sustenance

But to prorogue his grief.

’Twould be too tedious to repeat,

But the main grief springs from the loss

Of a belovèd daughter and a wife.

You may,

But bootless is your sight. He will not speak

To any.

Behold him. This was a goodly person,

Till the disaster that one mortal night

Drove him to this.

It is in vain; he will not speak to you.

Sure, all effectless; yet nothing we’ll omit

That bears recovery’s name.  But since your kindness

We have stretched thus far, let us beseech you

That for our gold we may provision have,

Wherein we are not destitute for want,

But weary for the staleness.

Sit, sir, I will recount it to you. But see,

I am prevented.

She’s a gallant lady.

Calls my lord?

I know not;

But here’s the regent, sir, of Mytilene

Speaks nobly of her.

Sir, ’tis the Governor of Mytilene,

Who, hearing of your melancholy state,

Did come to see you.

My lord, I hear none.

Sir.

Hail, madam, and my queen.

