


That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it;

For who digs hills because they do aspire

Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher.

O, my distressèd lord, even such our griefs are.

Here they are but felt, and seen with mischief’s eyes,

But like to groves, being topped, they higher rise.

I’ll do my best, sir.

O, ’tis too true.

Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.

The gods of Greece protect you, and we’ll pray for you.

O, your sweet queen! That the strict Fates had pleased

You had brought her hither to have blessed mine eyes with her!

I have one myself,

Who shall not be more dear to my respect

Than yours, my lord.

Thy oath remember. Thou hast sworn to do ’t.

’Tis but a blow which never shall be known.

Thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon

To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience,

Which is but cold in flaming, thy bosom inflame

Too nicely. Nor let pity, which even women

Have cast off, melt thee; but be a soldier

To thy purpose.

The fitter, then,

The gods should have her. Here she comes weeping

For her only mistress’ death. Thou art resolved?

How now, Marina? Why do you keep alone?

How chance my daughter is not with you?

Do not consume your blood with sorrowing.

Have you a nurse of me! Lord, how your favor ’s

Changed with this unprofitable woe.

Come, give me your flowers. O’er the sea marge

Walk with Leonine. The air is quick there,

And it pierces and sharpens the stomach.—Come, Leonine,

Take her by the arm. Walk with her.

Come, come.

I love the king your father and yourself

With more than foreign heart. We every day

Expect him here. When he shall come and find

Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,

He will repent the breadth of his great voyage,

Blame both my lord and me that we have taken

No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you,

Walk, and be cheerful once again. Reserve

That excellent complexion, which did steal

The eyes of young and old. Care not for me.

I can go home alone.

Come, come,

I know ’tis good for you.—Walk half an hour,

Leonine, at the least. Remember

What I have said.

I’ll leave you, my sweet lady, for a while.

Pray walk softly; do not heat your blood.

What, I must have care of you.

Why, are you foolish? Can it be undone?

I think you’ll turn a child again.

That she is dead. Nurses are not the Fates.

To foster is not ever to preserve.

She died at night; I’ll say so. Who can cross it

Unless you play the impious innocent

And, for an honest attribute, cry out

“She died by foul play!”

Be one of those that thinks

The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence

And open this to Pericles. I do shame

To think of what a noble strain you are,

And of how coward a spirit.

Be it so, then.

Yet none does know but you how she came dead,

Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.

She did distain my child and stood between

Her and her fortunes. None would look on her,

But cast their gazes on Marina’s face,

Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin

Not worth the time of day. It pierced me through,

And though you call my course unnatural,

You not your child well loving, yet I find

It greets me as an enterprise of kindness

Performed to your sole daughter.

And as for Pericles,

What should he say? We wept after her hearse,

And yet we mourn. Her monument is

Almost finished, and her epitaphs

In glitt’ring golden characters express

A general praise to her, and care in us

At whose expense ’tis done.

You’re like one that superstitiously

Do swear to the gods that winter kills the flies.

But yet I know you’ll do as I advise.

