


Young Prince of Tyre, you have at large received

The danger of the task you undertake.

Music!

Bring in our daughter, clothèd like a bride

For embracements even of Jove himself,

At whose conception, till Lucina reigned,

Nature this dowry gave: to glad her presence,

The senate house of planets all did sit

To knit in her their best perfections.

Prince Pericles—

Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,

With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touched;

For deathlike dragons here affright thee hard.

Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view

Her countless glory, which desert must gain;

And which without desert, because thine eye

Presumes to reach, all the whole heap must die.

Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself,

Drawn by report, advent’rous by desire,

Tell thee with speechless tongues and semblance pale

That, without covering save yon field of stars,

Here they stand martyrs slain in Cupid’s wars,

And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist

For going on death’s net, whom none resist.

Scorning advice, read the conclusion, then:

Which read and not expounded, ’tis decreed,

As these before thee, thou thyself shalt bleed.

Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life,

For that’s an article within our law

As dangerous as the rest. Your time’s expired.

Either expound now or receive your sentence.

Heaven, that I had thy head! He has found the meaning.

But I will gloze with him.—Young Prince of Tyre,

Though by the tenor of our strict edict,

Your exposition misinterpreting,

We might proceed to cancel of your days,

Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree

As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise.

Forty days longer we do respite you,

If by which time our secret be undone,

This mercy shows we’ll joy in such a son.

And until then, your entertain shall be

As doth befit our honor and your worth.

He hath found the meaning,

For which we mean to have his head.

He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy,

Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin

In such a loathèd manner.

And therefore instantly this prince must die,

For by his fall my honor must keep high.—

Who attends us there?

Thaliard, you are of our chamber, Thaliard,

And our mind partakes her private actions

To your secrecy; and for your faithfulness

We will advance you, Thaliard. Behold,

Here’s poison, and here’s gold.We hate the Prince

Of Tyre, and thou must kill him. It fits thee not

To ask the reason why: because we bid it.

Say, is it done?

Enough.

Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.

As thou wilt live, fly after,

and like an arrow shot from a well-experienced

archer hits the mark his eye doth level at, so thou

never return unless thou say Prince Pericles is

dead.

Thaliard, adieu. Till Pericles be dead,

My heart can lend no succor to my head.

