


I have, Antiochus, and with a soul

Emboldened with the glory of her praise

Think death no hazard in this enterprise.

See where she comes, appareled like the spring,

Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king

Of every virtue gives renown to men!

Her face the book of praises, where is read

Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence

Sorrow were ever razed, and testy wrath

Could never be her mild companion.

You gods that made me man, and sway in love,

That have inflamed desire in my breast

To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree

Or die in th’ adventure, be my helps,

As I am son and servant to your will,

To compass such a boundless happiness.

That would be son to great Antiochus.

Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught

My frail mortality to know itself,

And by those fearful objects to prepare

This body, like to them, to what I must.

For death remembered should be like a mirror

Who tells us life’s but breath, to trust it error.

I’ll make my will, then, and as sick men do

Who know the world, see heaven but, feeling woe,

Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did;

So I bequeath a happy peace to you

And all good men, as every prince should do;

My riches to the earth from whence they came,

But my unspotted fire of love to you.—

Thus ready for the way of life or death,

I wait the sharpest blow.

Like a bold champion I assume the lists,

Nor ask advice of any other thought

But faithfulness and courage.

I am no viper, yet I feed

On mother’s flesh which did me breed.

I sought a husband, in which labor

I found that kindness in a father.

He’s father, son, and husband mild;

I mother, wife, and yet his child.

How they may be, and yet in two,

As you will live resolve it you.

Sharp physic is the last! But, O you powers

That gives heaven countless eyes to view men’s acts,

Why cloud they not their sights perpetually

If this be true which makes me pale to read it?

Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still

Were not this glorious casket stored with ill.

But I must tell you now my thoughts revolt;

For he’s no man on whom perfections wait

That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate.

You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings

Who, fingered to make man his lawful music,

Would draw heaven down and all the gods to hearken;

But, being played upon before your time,

Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime.

Good sooth, I care not for you.

Great king,

Few love to hear the sins they love to act.

’Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it.

Who has a book of all that monarchs do,

He’s more secure to keep it shut than shown.

For vice repeated is like the wand’ring wind,

Blows dust in others’ eyes to spread itself;

And yet the end of all is bought thus dear:

The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear

To stop the air would hurt them. The blind mole casts

Copped hills towards heaven, to tell the Earth is thronged

By man’s oppression, and the poor worm doth die for ’t.

Kings are Earth’s gods; in vice their law’s their will;

And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill?

It is enough you know; and it is fit,

What being more known grows worse, to smother it.

All love the womb that their first being bred;

Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.

How courtesy would seem to cover sin

When what is done is like an hypocrite,

The which is good in nothing but in sight.

If it be true that I interpret false,

Then were it certain you were not so bad

As with foul incest to abuse your soul;

Where now you’re both a father and a son

By your untimely claspings with your child,

Which pleasures fits a husband, not a father,

And she an eater of her mother’s flesh

By the defiling of her parents’ bed;

And both like serpents are, who, though they feed

On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed.

Antioch, farewell, for wisdom sees those men

Blush not in actions blacker than the night

Will ’schew no course to keep them from the light.

One sin, I know, another doth provoke;

Murder’s as near to lust as flame to smoke.

Poison and treason are the hands of sin,

Ay, and the targets to put off the shame.

Then, lest my life be cropped to keep you clear,

By flight I’ll shun the danger which I fear.

Let none disturb us. Why should this change of thoughts,

The sad companion dull-eyed Melancholy,

Be my so used a guest as not an hour

In the day’s glorious walk or peaceful night,

The tomb where grief should sleep, can breed me quiet?

Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun them;

And danger, which I feared, is at Antioch,

Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here.

Yet neither pleasure’s art can joy my spirits,

Nor yet the other’s distance comfort me.

Then it is thus: the passions of the mind

That have their first conception by misdread

Have after-nourishment and life by care;

And what was first but fear what might be done

Grows elder now, and cares it be not done.

And so with me. The great Antiochus,

’Gainst whom I am too little to contend,

Since he’s so great can make his will his act,

Will think me speaking though I swear to silence;

Nor boots it me to say I honor him

If he suspect I may dishonor him.

And what may make him blush in being known,

He’ll stop the course by which it might be known.

With hostile forces he’ll o’er-spread the land,

And with th’ ostent of war will look so huge

Amazement shall drive courage from the state,

Our men be vanquished ere they do resist,

And subjects punished that ne’er thought offense;

Which care of them, not pity of myself,

Who am no more but as the tops of trees

Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them,

Makes both my body pine and soul to languish

And punish that before that he would punish.

All leave us else; but let your cares o’erlook

What shipping and what lading’s in our haven,

And then return to us. Helicanus,

Thou hast moved us. What seest thou in our looks?

If there be such a dart in princes’ frowns,

How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?

Thou knowest I have power to take thy life from thee.

Rise, prithee rise. Sit down. Thou art no flatterer.

I thank thee for ’t; and heaven forbid

That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid.

Fit counselor and servant for a prince,

Who by thy wisdom makes a prince thy servant,

What wouldst thou have me do?

Thou speak’st like a physician, Helicanus,

That ministers a potion unto me

That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.

Attend me, then: I went to Antioch,

Where, as thou know’st, against the face of death

I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty

From whence an issue I might propagate,

Are arms to princes and bring joys to subjects.

Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder,

The rest—hark in thine ear—as black as incest,

Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father

Seemed not to strike, but smooth. But thou know’st this:

’Tis time to fear when tyrants seems to kiss;

Which fear so grew in me I hither fled

Under the covering of a careful night,

Who seemed my good protector; and, being here,

Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.

I knew him tyrannous, and tyrants’ fears

Decrease not but grow faster than the years;

And should he doubt, as no doubt he doth,

That I should open to the list’ning air

How many worthy princes’ bloods were shed

To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope,

To lop that doubt he’ll fill this land with arms,

And make pretense of wrong that I have done him;

When all, for mine—if I may call ’t—offense,

Must feel war’s blow, who spares not innocence;

Which love to all—of which thyself art one,

Who now reproved’st me for ’t—

Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,

Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts

How I might stop this tempest ere it came;

And finding little comfort to relieve them,

I thought it princely charity to grieve for them.

I do not doubt thy faith.

But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?

Tyre, I now look from thee, then, and to Tarsus

Intend my travel, where I’ll hear from thee,

And by whose letters I’ll dispose myself.

The care I had and have of subjects’ good

On thee I lay, whose wisdom’s strength can bear it.

I’ll take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath.

Who shuns not to break one will crack both.

But in our orbs we’ll live so round and safe

That time of both this truth shall ne’er convince.

Thou showed’st a subject’s shine, I a true prince.

Lord Governor, for so we hear you are,

Let not our ships and number of our men

Be like a beacon fired t’ amaze your eyes.

We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre

And seen the desolation of your streets;

Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,

But to relieve them of their heavy load;

And these our ships, you happily may think

Are like the Trojan horse was stuffed within

With bloody veins expecting overthrow,

Are stored with corn to make your needy bread

And give them life whom hunger starved half dead.

Arise, I pray you, rise.

We do not look for reverence, but for love,

And harborage for ourself, our ships, and men.

Which welcome we’ll accept, feast here awhile,

Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.

Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven!

Wind, rain, and thunder, remember earthly man

Is but a substance that must yield to you,

And I, as fits my nature, do obey you.

Alas, the seas hath cast me on the rocks,

Washed me from shore to shore, and left my breath

Nothing to think on but ensuing death.

Let it suffice the greatness of your powers

To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes;

And, having thrown him from your wat’ry grave,

Here to have death in peace is all he’ll crave.

A pretty moral.

Simonides?

How from the finny subject of the sea

These fishers tell the infirmities of men,

And from their wat’ry empire recollect

All that may men approve or men detect!—

Peace be at your labor, honest fishermen.

May see the sea hath cast upon your coast—

A man whom both the waters and the wind

In that vast tennis court hath made the ball

For them to play upon entreats you pity him.

He asks of you that never used to beg.

I never practiced it.

What I have been I have forgot to know,

But what I am want teaches me to think on:

A man thronged up with cold. My veins are chill

And have no more of life than may suffice

To give my tongue that heat to ask your help—

Which, if you shall refuse, when I am dead,

For that I am a man, pray you see me buried.

I thank you, sir.

I did but crave.

Why, are your beggars whipped, then?

How well this honest mirth becomes their labor!

Not well.

“The good Simonides” do you call him?

He is a happy king, since he gains from his

subjects the name of “good” by his government.

How far is his court distant from this shore?

Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I

could wish to make one there.

An armor, friends? I pray you let me see it.

Thanks, Fortune, yet, that after all thy crosses

Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself;

And though it was mine own, part of my heritage

Which my dead father did bequeath to me

With this strict charge even as he left his life,

“Keep it, my Pericles; it hath been a shield

’Twixt me and death,” and pointed to this brace,

“For that it saved me, keep it. In like necessity—

The which the gods protect thee from—may ’t defend thee.”

It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it,

Till the rough seas, that spares not any man,

Took it in rage, though calmed have given ’t again.

I thank thee for ’t; my shipwrack now’s no ill

Since I have here my father gave in his will.

To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth,

For it was sometime target to a king;

I know it by this mark. He loved me dearly,

And for his sake I wish the having of it,

And that you’d guide me to your sovereign’s court,

Where with it I may appear a gentleman.

And if that ever my low fortune’s better,

I’ll pay your bounties; till then, rest your debtor.

I’ll show the virtue I have borne in arms.

Believe ’t, I will.

By your furtherance I am clothed in steel,

And spite of all the rupture of the sea,

This jewel holds his biding on my arm.

Unto thy value I will mount myself

Upon a courser, whose delightful steps

Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread.

Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided

Of a pair of bases.

Then honor be but a goal to my will;

This day I’ll rise or else add ill to ill.

’Tis more by fortune, lady, than my merit.

Some other is more fit.

You are right courteous knights.

Yon king’s to me like to my father’s picture,

Which tells in that glory once he was—

Had princes sit like stars about his throne,

And he the sun for them to reverence.

None that beheld him but like lesser lights

Did vail their crowns to his supremacy;

Where now his son’s like a glowworm in the night,

The which hath fire in darkness, none in light;

Whereby I see that Time’s the king of men.

He’s both their parent, and he is their grave,

And gives them what he will, not what they crave.

I thank him.

I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.

A gentleman of Tyre, my name Pericles.

My education been in arts and arms,

Who, looking for adventures in the world,

Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men,

And after shipwrack driven upon this shore.

In those that practice them they are, my lord.

I am at your Grace’s pleasure.

All fortune to the good Simonides.

It is your Grace’s pleasure to commend,

Not my desert.

The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.

A most virtuous princess.

As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.

I am unworthy for her schoolmaster.

What’s here?

A letter that she loves the knight of Tyre?

’Tis the King’s subtlety to have my life.—

O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord,

A stranger and distressèd gentleman

That never aimed so high to love your daughter,

But bent all offices to honor her.

By the gods, I have not!

Never did thought of mine levy offense;

Nor never did my actions yet commence

A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.

Traitor?

Even in his throat, unless it be the King

That calls me traitor, I return the lie.

My actions are as noble as my thoughts,

That never relished of a base descent.

I came unto your court for honor’s cause,

And not to be a rebel to her state,

And he that otherwise accounts of me,

This sword shall prove he’s honor’s enemy.

Then as you are as virtuous as fair,

Resolve your angry father if my tongue

Did e’er solicit or my hand subscribe

To any syllable that made love to you.

Even as my life my blood that fosters it.

Yes, if ’t please your Majesty.

The god of this great vast, rebuke these surges,

Which wash both heaven and hell! And thou that hast

Upon the winds command, bind them in brass,

Having called them from the deep! O, still

Thy deaf’ning dreadful thunders, gently quench

Thy nimble sulfurous flashes.—O, how, Lychorida,

How does my queen?—Then, storm, venomously

Wilt thou spit all thyself? The seaman’s whistle

Is as a whisper in the ears of death,

Unheard.—Lychorida!—Lucina, O

Divinest patroness and midwife gentle

To those that cry by night, convey thy deity

Aboard our dancing boat, make swift the pangs

Of my queen’s travails!—Now, Lychorida!

How? How, Lychorida?

O you gods!

Why do you make us love your goodly gifts

And snatch them straight away? We here below

Recall not what we give, and therein may

Use honor with you.

Now mild may be thy life,

For a more blusterous birth had never babe.

Quiet and gentle thy conditions, for

Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world

That ever was prince’s child. Happy what follows!

Thou hast as chiding a nativity

As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make

To herald thee from the womb.

Even at the first, thy loss is more than can

Thy portage quit, with all thou canst find here.

Now the good gods throw their best eyes upon ’t.

Courage enough. I do not fear the flaw.

It hath done to me the worst. Yet for the love

Of this poor infant, this fresh new seafarer,

I would it would be quiet.

That’s your superstition.

As you think meet.—Most wretched queen!

A terrible childbed hast thou had, my dear,

No light, no fire. Th’ unfriendly elements

Forgot thee utterly. Nor have I time

To give thee hallowed to thy grave, but straight

Must cast thee, scarcely coffined, in the ooze,

Where, for a monument upon thy bones

And e’er-remaining lamps, the belching whale

And humming water must o’erwhelm thy corpse,

Lying with simple shells.—O, Lychorida,

Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink, and paper,

My casket and my jewels; and bid Nicander

Bring me the satin coffin. Lay the babe

Upon the pillow. Hie thee, whiles I say

A priestly farewell to her. Suddenly, woman!

I thank thee, mariner. Say, what coast is this?

Thither, gentle mariner.

Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?

O, make for Tarsus!

There will I visit Cleon, for the babe

Cannot hold out to Tyrus. There I’ll leave it

At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner.

I’ll bring the body presently.

Most honored Cleon, I must needs be gone.

My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands

In a litigious peace. You and your lady

Take from my heart all thankfulness. The gods

Make up the rest upon you.

We cannot but obey the powers above us.

Could I rage and roar as doth the sea

She lies in, yet the end must be as ’tis.

My gentle babe Marina,

Whom, for she was born at sea, I have named so,

Here I charge your charity withal,

Leaving her the infant of your care,

Beseeching you to give her princely training,

That she may be mannered as she is born.

I believe you.

Your honor and your goodness teach me to ’t

Without your vows.—Till she be married, madam,

By bright Diana, whom we honor, all

Unscissored shall this hair of mine remain,

Though I show ill in ’t. So I take my leave.

Good madam, make me blessèd in your care

In bringing up my child.

Madam, my thanks and prayers.

I will embrace your offer.—Come, dearest madam.—

O, no tears, Lychorida, no tears!

Look to your little mistress, on whose grace

You may depend hereafter.—Come, my lord.

Hum, ha!

My fortunes—parentage—good parentage,

To equal mine! Was it not thus? What say you?

I do think so.

Pray you turn your eyes upon me.

You’re like something that—What countrywoman?

Here of these shores?

I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping.

My dearest wife was like this maid, and such

A one my daughter might have been: my queen’s

Square brows, her stature to an inch;

As wandlike straight, as silver-voiced; her eyes

As jewel-like, and cased as richly; in pace

Another Juno; who starves the ears she feeds

And makes them hungry the more she gives them speech.—

Where do you live?

Where were you bred? And how achieved you these

Endowments which you make more rich to owe?

Prithee, speak.

Falseness cannot come from thee, for thou lookest

Modest as Justice, and thou seemest a palace

For the crownèd Truth to dwell in. I will believe thee

And make my senses credit thy relation

To points that seem impossible, for thou lookest

Like one I loved indeed. What were thy friends?

Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back—

Which was when I perceived thee—that thou cam’st

From good descending?

Report thy parentage. I think thou said’st

Thou hadst been tossed from wrong to injury,

And that thou thought’st thy griefs might equal mine,

If both were opened.

Tell thy story.

If thine considered prove the thousand part

Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I

Have suffered like a girl. Yet thou dost look

Like Patience gazing on kings’ graves and smiling

Extremity out of act. What were thy friends?

How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind virgin,

Recount, I do beseech thee. Come, sit by me.

O, I am mocked,

And thou by some incensèd god sent hither

To make the world to laugh at me!

Nay, I’ll be patient.

Thou little know’st how thou dost startle me

To call thyself Marina.

How, a king’s daughter?

And called Marina?

But are you flesh and blood?

Have you a working pulse, and are no fairy

Motion? Well, speak on. Where were you born?

And wherefore called Marina?

At sea? What mother?

O, stop there a little!

This is the rarest dream that e’er dull sleep

Did mock sad fools withal. This cannot be

My daughter, buried.—Well, where were you bred?

I’ll hear you more, to the bottom of your story,

And never interrupt you.

I will believe you by the syllable

Of what you shall deliver. Yet give me leave:

How came you in these parts? Where were you bred?

Ho, Helicanus!

Thou art a grave and noble counselor,

Most wise in general. Tell me, if thou canst,

What this maid is, or what is like to be,

That thus hath made me weep.

O, Helicanus! Strike me, honored sir.

Give me a gash, put me to present pain,

Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me

O’erbear the shores of my mortality

And drown me with their sweetness.—O, come hither,

Thou that beget’st him that did thee beget,

Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus,

And found at sea again!—O, Helicanus,

Down on thy knees! Thank the holy gods as loud

As thunder threatens us. This is Marina.—

What was thy mother’s name? Tell me but that,

For truth can never be confirmed enough,

Though doubts did ever sleep.

I am Pericles of Tyre. But tell me now

My drowned queen’s name, as in the rest you said

Thou hast been godlike perfect, the heir of kingdoms,

And another life to Pericles thy father.

Now, blessing on thee! Rise. Thou ’rt my child.—

Give me fresh garments.—Mine own Helicanus,

She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should

Have been, by savage Cleon. She shall tell thee all,

When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge

She is thy very princess. Who is this?

I embrace you.—

Give me my robes.—I am wild in my beholding.

O heavens bless my girl! But hark, what music?

Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him o’er

Point by point, for yet he seems to doubt,

How sure you are my daughter.—But what music?

None?

The music of the spheres!—List, my Marina.

Rarest sounds! Do you not hear?

Most heavenly music.

It nips me unto list’ning, and thick slumber

Hangs upon mine eyes. Let me rest.

Celestial Dian,

Goddess argentine, I will obey thee.—

Helicanus!

My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike

The inhospitable Cleon, but I am

For other service first. Toward Ephesus

Turn our blown sails. Eftsoons I’ll tell thee why.—

Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore,

And give you gold for such provision

As our intents will need?

You shall prevail

Were it to woo my daughter, for it seems

You have been noble towards her.

Come, my Marina.

Hail, Dian! To perform thy just command,

I here confess myself the King of Tyre,

Who, frighted from my country, did wed

At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa.

At sea in childbed died she, but brought forth

A maid child called Marina, whom, O goddess,

Wears yet thy silver livery. She at Tarsus

Was nursed with Cleon, who at fourteen years

He sought to murder. But her better stars

Brought her to Mytilene, ’gainst whose shore riding,

Her fortunes brought the maid aboard us, where,

By her own most clear remembrance, she made known

Herself my daughter.

What means the nun? She dies! Help, gentlemen!

Reverend appearer, no.

I threw her overboard with these very arms.

’Tis most certain.

May we see them?

The voice of dead Thaisa!

Immortal Dian!

This, this! No more, you gods! Your present kindness

Makes my past miseries sports. You shall do well

That on the touching of her lips I may

Melt and no more be seen.—O, come, be buried

A second time within these arms!

Look who kneels here, flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa,

Thy burden at the sea, and called Marina

For she was yielded there.

You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre

I left behind an ancient substitute.

Can you remember what I called the man?

I have named him oft.

Still confirmation!

Embrace him, dear Thaisa. This is he.

Now do I long to hear how you were found,

How possibly preserved, and who to thank,

Besides the gods, for this great miracle.

Reverend sir,

The gods can have no mortal officer

More like a god than you. Will you deliver

How this dead queen relives?

Pure Dian, I bless thee for thy vision, and

Will offer night oblations to thee.—Thaisa,

This prince, the fair betrothèd of your daughter,

Shall marry her at Pentapolis.—And now this ornament

Makes me look dismal will I clip to form,

And what this fourteen years no razor touched,

To grace thy marriage day I’ll beautify.

Heavens make a star of him! Yet there, my queen,

We’ll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves

Will in that kingdom spend our following days.

Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.—

Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay

To hear the rest untold. Sir, lead ’s the way.

