


Philemon, ho!

Get fire and meat for these poor men.

’T has been a turbulent and stormy night.

Your master will be dead ere you return.

There’s nothing can be ministered to nature

That can recover him. Give this to the ’pothecary,

And tell me how it works.

Gentlemen, why do you stir so early?

O, you say well.

I hold it ever

Virtue and cunning were endowments greater

Than nobleness and riches. Careless heirs

May the two latter darken and expend,

But immortality attends the former,

Making a man a god. ’Tis known I ever

Have studied physic, through which secret art,

By turning o’er authorities, I have,

Together with my practice, made familiar

To me and to my aid the blessed infusions

That dwells in vegetives, in metals, stones;

And can speak of the disturbances

That Nature works, and of her cures; which doth give me

A more content in course of true delight

Than to be thirsty after tottering honor,

Or tie my pleasure up in silken bags

To please the fool and death.

What’s that?

Set ’t down. Let’s look upon ’t.

What e’er it be,

’Tis wondrous heavy. Wrench it open straight.

If the sea’s stomach be o’ercharged with gold,

’Tis a good constraint of Fortune it belches upon us.

How close ’tis caulked and bitumed!

Did the sea cast it up?

Wrench it open.

Soft! It smells most sweetly in my sense.

As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it.

O, you most potent gods! What’s here? A corse?

Shrouded in cloth of state, balmed and entreasured

With full bags of spices. A passport too!

Apollo, perfect me in the characters.

Here I give to understand,

If e’er this coffin drives aland,

I, King Pericles, have lost

This queen, worth all our mundane cost.

Who finds her, give her burying.

She was the daughter of a king.

Besides this treasure for a fee,

The gods requite his charity.

If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart

That ever cracks for woe. This chanced tonight.

Nay, certainly tonight,

For look how fresh she looks. They were too rough

That threw her in the sea.—Make a fire within;

Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.

Death may usurp on nature many hours,

And yet the fire of life kindle again

The o’erpressed spirits. I heard of an Egyptian

That had nine hours lain dead,

Who was by good appliance recoverèd.

Well said, well said! The fire and cloths.

The rough and woeful music that we have,

Cause it to sound, beseech you. The viol once more!

How thou stirr’st, thou block! The music there.

I pray you, give her air. Gentlemen,

This queen will live. Nature awakes a warm breath

Out of her. She hath not been entranced

Above five hours. See how she gins to blow

Into life’s flower again.

She is alive. Behold her eyelids—

Cases to those heavenly jewels which Pericles hath lost—

Begin to part their fringes of bright gold.

The diamonds of a most praised water doth

Appear to make the world twice rich.—Live,

And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature,

Rare as you seem to be.

Hush, my gentle neighbors!

Lend me your hands. To the next chamber bear her.

Get linen. Now this matter must be looked to,

For her relapse is mortal. Come, come;

And Aesculapius guide us.

Madam, this letter and some certain jewels

Lay with you in your coffer, which are

At your command. Know you the character?

Madam, if this

You purpose as you speak, Diana’s temple

Is not distant far, where you may abide

Till your date expire. Moreover, if you

Please, a niece of mine shall there attend you.

Noble sir,

If you have told Diana’s altar true,

This is your wife.

Upon this coast, I warrant you.

Look to the lady. O, she’s but overjoyed.

Early one blustering morn this lady was

Thrown upon this shore. I oped the coffin,

Found there rich jewels, recovered her, and placed her

Here in Diana’s temple.

Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house,

Whither I invite you. Look, Thaisa

Is recoverèd.

I will, my lord.

Beseech you, first go with me to my house,

Where shall be shown you all was found with her,

How she came placed here in the temple,

No needful thing omitted.

