


It pleaseth you, my royal father, to express

My commendations great, whose merit’s less.

Which to preserve mine honor, I’ll perform.

A knight of Sparta, my renownèd father,

And the device he bears upon his shield

Is a black Ethiop reaching at the sun;

The word: Lux tua vita mihi.

A prince of Macedon, my royal father,

And the device he bears upon his shield

Is an armed knight that’s conquered by a lady.

The motto thus, in Spanish: Pue per doleera kee per forsa.

The third, of Antioch;

And his device a wreath of chivalry;

The word: Me pompae provexit apex.

A burning torch that’s turnèd upside down;

The word: Qui me alit me extinguit.

The fifth, an hand environèd with clouds,

Holding out gold that’s by the touchstone tried;

The motto thus: Sic spectanda fides.

He seems to be a stranger; but his present is

A withered branch that’s only green at top,

The motto: In hac spe vivo.

But you my knight and guest,

To whom this wreath of victory I give

And crown you king of this day’s happiness.

By Juno, that is queen of marriage,

All viands that I eat do seem unsavory,

Wishing him my meat.—Sure, he’s a gallant gentleman.

To me he seems like diamond to glass.

What is ’t to me, my father?

Alas, my father, it befits not me

Unto a stranger knight to be so bold.

He may my proffer take for an offense,

Since men take women’s gifts for impudence.

Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.

The King, my father, sir, has drunk to you.

Wishing it so much blood unto your life.

And further, he desires to know of you

Of whence you are, your name and parentage.

He thanks your Grace; names himself Pericles,

A gentleman of Tyre,

Who only by misfortune of the seas,

Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.

Why, sir, say if you had, who takes offense

At that would make me glad?

Yes, if you love me, sir.

Yes, if ’t please your Majesty.

O dear Diana,

Where am I? Where’s my lord? What world is this?

It is my lord’s. That I was shipped at sea

I well remember, even on my bearing time,

But whether there delivered, by the holy gods

I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles,

My wedded lord, I ne’er shall see again,

A vestal livery will I take me to,

And never more have joy.

My recompense is thanks, that’s all;

Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.

Voice and favor!

You are, you are—O royal Pericles!

O, let me look!

If he be none of mine, my sanctity

Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,

But curb it, spite of seeing.—O, my lord,

Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake,

Like him you are. Did you not name a tempest,

A birth and death?

That Thaisa am I, supposèd dead

And drowned.

Now I know you better.

When we with tears parted Pentapolis,

The king my father gave you such a ring.

Blessed, and mine own!

I know you not.

’Twas Helicanus then.

Lord Cerimon, my lord, this man

Through whom the gods have shown their power, that can

From first to last resolve you.

Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,

My father’s dead.

