


I have, my liege.

As near as I could sift him on that argument,

On some apparent danger seen in him

Aimed at your Highness, no inveterate malice.

To be a make-peace shall become my age.—

Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk’s gage.

When, Harry, when?

Obedience bids I should not bid again.

Alas, the part I had in Woodstock’s blood

Doth more solicit me than your exclaims

To stir against the butchers of his life.

But since correction lieth in those hands

Which made the fault that we cannot correct,

Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,

Who, when they see the hours ripe on Earth,

Will rain hot vengeance on offenders’ heads.

God’s is the quarrel; for God’s substitute,

His deputy anointed in His sight,

Hath caused his death, the which if wrongfully

Let heaven revenge, for I may never lift

An angry arm against His minister.

To God, the widow’s champion and defense.

Sister, farewell. I must to Coventry.

As much good stay with thee as go with me.

God in thy good cause make thee prosperous.

Be swift like lightning in the execution,

And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,

Fall like amazing thunder on the casque

Of thy adverse pernicious enemy.

Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant, and live.

I thank my liege that in regard of me

He shortens four years of my son’s exile.

But little vantage shall I reap thereby;

For, ere the six years that he hath to spend

Can change their moons and bring their times about,

My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light

Shall be extinct with age and endless night;

My inch of taper will be burnt and done,

And blindfold death not let me see my son.

But not a minute, king, that thou canst give.

Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,

And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow.

Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,

But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage.

Thy word is current with him for my death,

But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.

You urged me as a judge, but I had rather

You would have bid me argue like a father.

O, had it been a stranger, not my child,

To smooth his fault I should have been more mild.

A partial slander sought I to avoid,

And in the sentence my own life destroyed.

Alas, I looked when some of you should say

I was too strict, to make mine own away.

But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue

Against my will to do myself this wrong.

O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,

That thou returnest no greeting to thy friends?

Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.

What is six winters? They are quickly gone.

Call it a travel that thou tak’st for pleasure.

The sullen passage of thy weary steps

Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set

The precious jewel of thy home return.

All places that the eye of heaven visits

Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.

Teach thy necessity to reason thus:

There is no virtue like necessity.

Think not the King did banish thee,

But thou the King. Woe doth the heavier sit

Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.

Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honor,

And not the King exiled thee; or suppose

Devouring pestilence hangs in our air

And thou art flying to a fresher clime.

Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it

To lie that way thou goest, not whence thou com’st.

Suppose the singing birds musicians,

The grass whereon thou tread’st the presence strewed,

The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more

Than a delightful measure or a dance;

For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite

The man that mocks at it and sets it light.

Come, come, my son, I’ll bring thee on thy way.

Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.

Will the King come, that I may breathe my last

In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?

O, but they say the tongues of dying men

Enforce attention like deep harmony.

Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,

For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.

He that no more must say is listened more

Than they whom youth and ease have taught to gloze.

More are men’s ends marked than their lives before.

The setting sun and music at the close,

As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,

Writ in remembrance more than things long past.

Though Richard my life’s counsel would not hear,

My death’s sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.

Methinks I am a prophet new inspired

And thus expiring do foretell of him:

His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,

For violent fires soon burn out themselves;

Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;

He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;

With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder;

Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,

Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.

This royal throne of kings, this sceptered isle,

This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,

This other Eden, demi-paradise,

This fortress built by Nature for herself

Against infection and the hand of war,

This happy breed of men, this little world,

This precious stone set in the silver sea,

Which serves it in the office of a wall

Or as a moat defensive to a house,

Against the envy of less happier lands,

This blessèd plot, this earth, this realm, this England,

This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,

Feared by their breed and famous by their birth,

Renownèd for their deeds as far from home

For Christian service and true chivalry

As is the sepulcher in stubborn Jewry

Of the world’s ransom, blessèd Mary’s son,

This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,

Dear for her reputation through the world,

Is now leased out—I die pronouncing it—

Like to a tenement or pelting farm.

England, bound in with the triumphant sea,

Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege

Of wat’ry Neptune, is now bound in with shame,

With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds.

That England that was wont to conquer others

Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.

Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,

How happy then were my ensuing death!

O, how that name befits my composition!

Old Gaunt indeed and gaunt in being old.

Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast,

And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?

For sleeping England long time have I watched;

Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt.

The pleasure that some fathers feed upon

Is my strict fast—I mean my children’s looks—

And, therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt.

Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,

Whose hollow womb inherits naught but bones.

No, misery makes sport to mock itself.

Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,

I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.

No, no, men living flatter those that die.

O, no, thou diest, though I the sicker be.

Now He that made me knows I see thee ill,

Ill in myself to see, and in thee, seeing ill.

Thy deathbed is no lesser than thy land,

Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;

And thou, too careless-patient as thou art,

Commit’st thy anointed body to the cure

Of those physicians that first wounded thee.

A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,

Whose compass is no bigger than thy head,

And yet encagèd in so small a verge,

The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.

O, had thy grandsire with a prophet’s eye

Seen how his son’s son should destroy his sons,

From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,

Deposing thee before thou wert possessed,

Which art possessed now to depose thyself.

Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,

It were a shame to let this land by lease;

But, for thy world enjoying but this land,

Is it not more than shame to shame it so?

Landlord of England art thou now, not king.

Thy state of law is bondslave to the law,

And thou—

O, spare me not, my brother Edward’s son,

For that I was his father Edward’s son!

That blood already, like the pelican,

Hast thou tapped out and drunkenly caroused.

My brother Gloucester—plain, well-meaning soul,

Whom fair befall in heaven ’mongst happy souls—

May be a precedent and witness good

That thou respect’st not spilling Edward’s blood.

Join with the present sickness that I have,

And thy unkindness be like crooked age

To crop at once a too-long withered flower.

Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!

These words hereafter thy tormentors be!—

Convey me to my bed, then to my grave.

Love they to live that love and honor have.

