


Each day still better other’s happiness

Until the heavens, envying earth’s good hap,

Add an immortal title to your crown.

Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal.

’Tis not the trial of a woman’s war,

The bitter clamor of two eager tongues,

Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain.

The blood is hot that must be cooled for this.

Yet can I not of such tame patience boast

As to be hushed and naught at all to say.

First, the fair reverence of your Highness curbs me

From giving reins and spurs to my free speech,

Which else would post until it had returned

These terms of treason doubled down his throat.

Setting aside his high blood’s royalty,

And let him be no kinsman to my liege,

I do defy him, and I spit at him,

Call him a slanderous coward and a villain,

Which to maintain I would allow him odds

And meet him, were I tied to run afoot

Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps

Or any other ground inhabitable

Wherever Englishman durst set his foot.

Meantime let this defend my loyalty:

By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.

I take it up, and by that sword I swear

Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,

I’ll answer thee in any fair degree

Or chivalrous design of knightly trial;

And when I mount, alive may I not light

If I be traitor or unjustly fight.

O, let my sovereign turn away his face

And bid his ears a little while be deaf,

Till I have told this slander of his blood

How God and good men hate so foul a liar.

Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,

Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.

Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais

Disbursed I duly to his Highness’ soldiers;

The other part reserved I by consent,

For that my sovereign liege was in my debt

Upon remainder of a dear account

Since last I went to France to fetch his queen.

Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester’s death,

I slew him not, but to my own disgrace

Neglected my sworn duty in that case.—

For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,

The honorable father to my foe,

Once did I lay an ambush for your life,

A trespass that doth vex my grievèd soul.

But ere I last received the sacrament,

I did confess it and exactly begged

Your Grace’s pardon, and I hope I had it.—

This is my fault. As for the rest appealed,

It issues from the rancor of a villain,

A recreant and most degenerate traitor,

Which in myself I boldly will defend,

And interchangeably hurl down my gage

Upon this overweening traitor’s foot,

To prove myself a loyal gentleman,

Even in the best blood chambered in his bosom;

In haste whereof most heartily I pray

Your Highness to assign our trial day.

Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.

My life thou shalt command, but not my shame.

The one my duty owes, but my fair name,

Despite of death that lives upon my grave,

To dark dishonor’s use thou shalt not have.

I am disgraced, impeached, and baffled here,

Pierced to the soul with slander’s venomed spear,

The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood

Which breathed this poison.

Yea, but not change his spots. Take but my shame

And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,

The purest treasure mortal times afford

Is spotless reputation; that away,

Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.

A jewel in a ten-times-barred-up chest

Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.

Mine honor is my life; both grow in one.

Take honor from me and my life is done.

Then, dear my liege, mine honor let me try.

In that I live, and for that will I die.

My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,

Who hither come engagèd by my oath—

Which God defend a knight should violate!—

Both to defend my loyalty and truth

To God, my king, and my succeeding issue,

Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me,

And by the grace of God and this mine arm

To prove him, in defending of myself,

A traitor to my God, my king, and me;

And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.

However God or fortune cast my lot,

There lives or dies, true to King Richard’s throne,

A loyal, just, and upright gentleman.

Never did captive with a freer heart

Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace

His golden uncontrolled enfranchisement

More than my dancing soul doth celebrate

This feast of battle with mine adversary.

Most mighty liege and my companion peers,

Take from my mouth the wish of happy years.

As gentle and as jocund as to jest

Go I to fight. Truth hath a quiet breast.

A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,

And all unlooked-for from your Highness’ mouth.

A dearer merit, not so deep a maim

As to be cast forth in the common air,

Have I deservèd at your Highness’ hands.

The language I have learnt these forty years,

My native English, now I must forgo;

And now my tongue’s use is to me no more

Than an unstringèd viol or a harp,

Or like a cunning instrument cased up,

Or, being open, put into his hands

That knows no touch to tune the harmony.

Within my mouth you have enjailed my tongue,

Doubly portcullised with my teeth and lips,

And dull unfeeling barren ignorance

Is made my jailor to attend on me.

I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,

Too far in years to be a pupil now.

What is thy sentence then but speechless death,

Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?

Then thus I turn me from my country’s light,

To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

And I, to keep all this.

No, Bolingbroke; if ever I were traitor,

My name be blotted from the book of life,

And I from heaven banished as from hence.

But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know,

And all too soon, I fear, the King shall rue.—

Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;

Save back to England, all the world’s my way.

