


How fares our noble uncle Lancaster?

To please the King I did; to please myself

I cannot do it. Yet I know no cause

Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,

Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest

As my sweet Richard. Yet again methinks

Some unborn sorrow ripe in Fortune’s womb

Is coming towards me, and my inward soul

With nothing trembles. At some thing it grieves

More than with parting from my lord the King.

It may be so, but yet my inward soul

Persuades me it is otherwise. Howe’er it be,

I cannot but be sad—so heavy sad

As thought, on thinking on no thought I think,

Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.

’Tis nothing less. Conceit is still derived

From some forefather grief. Mine is not so,

For nothing hath begot my something grief—

Or something hath the nothing that I grieve.

’Tis in reversion that I do possess,

But what it is that is not yet known what,

I cannot name. ’Tis nameless woe, I wot.

Why hopest thou so? ’Tis better hope he is,

For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope.

Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipped?

Now God in heaven forbid!

So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,

And Bolingbroke my sorrow’s dismal heir.

Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,

And I, a gasping new-delivered mother,

Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow joined.

Who shall hinder me?

I will despair and be at enmity

With cozening hope. He is a flatterer,

A parasite, a keeper-back of death,

Who gently would dissolve the bands of life

Which false hope lingers in extremity.

With signs of war about his agèd neck.

O, full of careful business are his looks!—

Uncle, for God’s sake speak comfortable words.

What sport shall we devise here in this garden

To drive away the heavy thought of care?

’Twill make me think the world is full of rubs

And that my fortune runs against the bias.

My legs can keep no measure in delight

When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief.

Therefore no dancing, girl. Some other sport.

Of sorrow or of joy?

Of neither, girl,

For if of joy, being altogether wanting,

It doth remember me the more of sorrow;

Or if of grief, being altogether had,

It adds more sorrow to my want of joy.

For what I have I need not to repeat,

And what I want it boots not to complain.

’Tis well that thou hast cause,

But thou shouldst please me better wouldst thou weep.

And I could sing, would weeping do me good,

And never borrow any tear of thee.

But stay, here come the gardeners.

Let’s step into the shadow of these trees.

My wretchedness unto a row of pins,

They will talk of state, for everyone doth so

Against a change. Woe is forerun with woe.

O, I am pressed to death through want of speaking!

Thou old Adam’s likeness, set to dress this garden,

How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?

What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee

To make a second fall of cursèd man?

Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?

Dar’st thou, thou little better thing than earth,

Divine his downfall? Say where, when, and how

Cam’st thou by this ill tidings? Speak, thou wretch!

Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,

Doth not thy embassage belong to me,

And am I last that knows it? O, thou thinkest

To serve me last that I may longest keep

Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go

To meet at London London’s king in woe.

What, was I born to this, that my sad look

Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?—

Gard’ner, for telling me these news of woe,

Pray God the plants thou graft’st may never grow.

This way the King will come. This is the way

To Julius Caesar’s ill-erected tower,

To whose flint bosom my condemnèd lord

Is doomed a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke.

Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth

Have any resting for her true king’s queen.

But soft, but see—or rather do not see

My fair rose wither; yet look up, behold,

That you in pity may dissolve to dew

And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.—

Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,

Thou map of honor, thou King Richard’s tomb,

And not King Richard! Thou most beauteous inn,

Why should hard-favored grief be lodged in thee

When triumph is become an alehouse guest?

What, is my Richard both in shape and mind

Transformed and weakened? Hath Bolingbroke

Deposed thine intellect? Hath he been in thy heart?

The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw

And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage

To be o’er-powered; and wilt thou, pupil-like,

Take the correction, mildly kiss the rod,

And fawn on rage with base humility,

Which art a lion and the king of beasts?

And must we be divided? Must we part?

Banish us both, and send the King with me.

Then whither he goes, thither let me go.

So longest way shall have the longest moans.

Give me mine own again. ’Twere no good part

To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.

So, now I have mine own again, begone,

That I may strive to kill it with a groan.

