


And lessened be that small, God I beseech Him!

Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.

Out, devil! I do remember them too well:

Thou killed’st my husband Henry in the Tower,

And Edward, my poor son, at Tewkesbury.

Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.

A murd’rous villain, and so still thou art.

Which God revenge!

Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave this world,

Thou cacodemon! There thy kingdom is.

As little joy enjoys the queen thereof,

For I am she, and altogether joyless.

I can no longer hold me patient.

Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out

In sharing that which you have pilled from me!

Which of you trembles not that looks on me?

If not, that I am queen, you bow like subjects,

Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels.—

Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.

But repetition of what thou hast marred.

That will I make before I let thee go.

I was, but I do find more pain in banishment

Than death can yield me here by my abode.

A husband and a son thou ow’st to me;

And thou a kingdom;—all of you, allegiance.

This sorrow that I have by right is yours,

And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.

What, were you snarling all before I came,

Ready to catch each other by the throat,

And turn you all your hatred now on me?

Did York’s dread curse prevail so much with heaven

That Henry’s death, my lovely Edward’s death,

Their kingdom’s loss, my woeful banishment,

Should all but answer for that peevish brat?

Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?

Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!

Though not by war, by surfeit die your king,

As ours by murder to make him a king.

Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales,

For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales,

Die in his youth by like untimely violence.

Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,

Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self.

Long mayst thou live to wail thy children’s death

And see another, as I see thee now,

Decked in thy rights, as thou art stalled in mine.

Long die thy happy days before thy death,

And, after many lengthened hours of grief,

Die neither mother, wife, nor England’s queen.—

Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by,

And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son

Was stabbed with bloody daggers. God I pray Him

That none of you may live his natural age,

But by some unlooked accident cut off.

And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.

If heaven have any grievous plague in store

Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,

O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe

And then hurl down their indignation

On thee, the troubler of the poor world’s peace.

The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul.

Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv’st,

And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends.

No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,

Unless it be while some tormenting dream

Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.

Thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog,

Thou that wast sealed in thy nativity

The slave of nature and the son of hell,

Thou slander of thy heavy mother’s womb,

Thou loathèd issue of thy father’s loins,

Thou rag of honor, thou detested—

Richard!

I call thee not.

Why, so I did, but looked for no reply.

O, let me make the period to my curse!

Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune,

Why strew’st thou sugar on that bottled spider,

Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?

Fool, fool, thou whet’st a knife to kill thyself.

The day will come that thou shalt wish for me

To help thee curse this poisonous bunch-backed toad.

Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.

To serve me well, you all should do me duty:

Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects.

O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!

Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert.

Your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current.

O, that your young nobility could judge

What ’twere to lose it and be miserable!

They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,

And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.

And turns the sun to shade. Alas, alas,

Witness my son, now in the shade of death,

Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath

Hath in eternal darkness folded up.

Your aerie buildeth in our aerie’s nest.

O God, that seest it, do not suffer it!

As it is won with blood, lost be it so.

Urge neither charity nor shame to me.

Uncharitably with me have you dealt,

And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered.

My charity is outrage, life my shame,

And in that shame still live my sorrows’ rage.

O princely Buckingham, I’ll kiss thy hand

In sign of league and amity with thee.

Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!

Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,

Nor thou within the compass of my curse.

I will not think but they ascend the sky,

And there awake God’s gentle sleeping peace.

O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!

Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,

His venom tooth will rankle to the death.

Have not to do with him. Beware of him.

Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,

And all their ministers attend on him.

What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel,

And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?

O, but remember this another day,

When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,

And say poor Margaret was a prophetess.—

Live each of you the subjects to his hate,

And he to yours, and all of you to God’s.

So now prosperity begins to mellow

And drop into the rotten mouth of death.

Here in these confines slyly have I lurked

To watch the waning of mine enemies.

A dire induction am I witness to,

And will to France, hoping the consequence

Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.

Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes here?

Hover about her; say that right for right

Hath dimmed your infant morn to agèd night.

Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet;

Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.

When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.

If ancient sorrow be most reverend,

Give mine the benefit of seigniory,

And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.

If sorrow can admit society,

Tell over your woes again by viewing mine.

I had an Edward till a Richard killed him;

I had a husband till a Richard killed him.

Thou hadst an Edward till a Richard killed him;

Thou hadst a Richard till a Richard killed him.

Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him.

From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept

A hellhound that doth hunt us all to death—

That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,

To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood;

That excellent grand tyrant of the Earth,

That reigns in gallèd eyes of weeping souls;

That foul defacer of God’s handiwork

Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.

O upright, just, and true-disposing God,

How do I thank thee that this carnal cur

Preys on the issue of his mother’s body

And makes her pew-fellow with others’ moan!

Bear with me. I am hungry for revenge,

And now I cloy me with beholding it.

Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward,

Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;

Young York, he is but boot, because both they

Matched not the high perfection of my loss.

Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward,

And the beholders of this frantic play,

Th’ adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,

Untimely smothered in their dusky graves.

Richard yet lives, hell’s black intelligencer,

Only reserved their factor to buy souls

And send them thither. But at hand, at hand

Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.

Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray,

To have him suddenly conveyed from hence.

Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,

That I may live and say “The dog is dead.”

I called thee then “vain flourish of my fortune.”

I called thee then poor shadow, “painted queen,”

The presentation of but what I was,

The flattering index of a direful pageant,

One heaved a-high to be hurled down below,

A mother only mocked with two fair babes,

A dream of what thou wast, a garish flag

To be the aim of every dangerous shot,

A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble,

A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.

Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?

Where are thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?

Who sues and kneels and says “God save the Queen?”

Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?

Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?

Decline all this, and see what now thou art:

For happy wife, a most distressèd widow;

For joyful mother, one that wails the name;

For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;

For queen, a very caitiff crowned with care;

For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me;

For she being feared of all, now fearing one;

For she commanding all, obeyed of none.

Thus hath the course of justice whirled about

And left thee but a very prey to time,

Having no more but thought of what thou wast

To torture thee the more, being what thou art.

Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not

Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?

Now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke,

From which even here I slip my weary head

And leave the burden of it all on thee.

Farewell, York’s wife, and queen of sad mischance.

These English woes shall make me smile in France.

Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;

Compare dead happiness with living woe;

Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,

And he that slew them fouler than he is.

Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse.

Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.

Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.

