


What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

My sword, I say. Old Montague is come

And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

But Montague is bound as well as I,

In penalty alike, and ’tis not hard, I think,

For men so old as we to keep the peace.

But saying o’er what I have said before.

My child is yet a stranger in the world.

She hath not seen the change of fourteen years.

Let two more summers wither in their pride

Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

And too soon marred are those so early made.

Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;

She’s the hopeful lady of my earth.

But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;

My will to her consent is but a part.

And, she agreed, within her scope of choice

Lies my consent and fair according voice.

This night I hold an old accustomed feast,

Whereto I have invited many a guest

Such as I love; and you among the store,

One more, most welcome, makes my number more.

At my poor house look to behold this night

Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.

Such comfort as do lusty young men feel

When well-appareled April on the heel

Of limping winter treads, even such delight

Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night

Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,

And like her most whose merit most shall be;

Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,

May stand in number, though in reck’ning none.

Come go with me. Go, sirrah, trudge about

Through fair Verona, find those persons out

Whose names are written there, and to them say

My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

Welcome, gentlemen. Ladies that have their toes

Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you.—

Ah, my mistresses, which of you all

Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,

She, I’ll swear, hath corns. Am I come near you now?—

Welcome, gentlemen. I have seen the day

That I have worn a visor and could tell

A whispering tale in a fair lady’s ear,

Such as would please. ’Tis gone, ’tis gone, ’tis gone.

You are welcome, gentlemen.—Come, musicians, play.

A hall, a hall, give room!—And foot it, girls.—

More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up,

And quench the fire; the room is grown too hot.—

Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.—

Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,

For you and I are past our dancing days.

How long is ’t now since last yourself and I

Were in a mask?

What, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much.

’Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,

Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,

Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.

Will you tell me that?

His son was but a ward two years ago.

Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?

Young Romeo is it?

Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone.

He bears him like a portly gentleman,

And, to say truth, Verona brags of him

To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.

I would not for the wealth of all this town

Here in my house do him disparagement.

Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.

It is my will, the which if thou respect,

Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,

An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

He shall be endured.

What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to.

Am I the master here or you? Go to.

You’ll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,

You’ll make a mutiny among my guests,

You will set cock-a-hoop, you’ll be the man!

Go to, go to.

You are a saucy boy. Is ’t so indeed?

This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.

You must contrary me. Marry, ’tis time—

Well said, my hearts.—You are a princox, go.

Be quiet, or—More light, more light!—for shame,

I’ll make you quiet.—What, cheerly, my hearts!

Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.

We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.—

Is it e’en so? Why then, I thank you all.

I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.—

More torches here.—Come on then, let’s to bed.—

Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late.

I’ll to my rest.

Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily

That we have had no time to move our daughter.

Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,

And so did I. Well, we were born to die.

’Tis very late. She’ll not come down tonight.

I promise you, but for your company,

I would have been abed an hour ago.

Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender

Of my child’s love. I think she will be ruled

In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not.—

Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.

Acquaint her here of my son Paris’ love,

And bid her—mark you me?—on Wednesday next—

But soft, what day is this?

Monday, ha ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.

O’ Thursday let it be.—O’ Thursday, tell her,

She shall be married to this noble earl.—

Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?

We’ll keep no great ado: a friend or two.

For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,

It may be thought we held him carelessly,

Being our kinsman, if we revel much.

Therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends,

And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

Well, get you gone. O’ Thursday be it, then.

Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed.

Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.—

Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho!—

Afore me, it is so very late that we

May call it early by and by.—Good night.

When the sun sets, the earth doth drizzle dew,

But for the sunset of my brother’s son

It rains downright.

How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?

Evermore show’ring? In one little body

Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.

For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,

Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,

Sailing in this salt flood; the winds thy sighs,

Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,

Without a sudden calm, will overset

Thy tempest-tossèd body.—How now, wife?

Have you delivered to her our decree?

Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.

How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?

Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed,

Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought

So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?

How, how, how, how? Chopped logic? What is this?

“Proud,” and “I thank you,” and “I thank you not,”

And yet “not proud”? Mistress minion you,

Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,

But fettle your fine joints ’gainst Thursday next

To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church,

Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.

Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!

You tallow face!

Hang thee, young baggage, disobedient wretch!

I tell thee what: get thee to church o’ Thursday,

Or never after look me in the face.

Speak not; reply not; do not answer me.

My fingers itch.—Wife, we scarce thought us blessed

That God had lent us but this only child,

But now I see this one is one too much,

And that we have a curse in having her.

Out on her, hilding.

And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue.

Good Prudence, smatter with your gossips, go.

O, God ’i’ g’ eden!

Peace, you mumbling fool!

Utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl,

For here we need it not.

God’s bread, it makes me mad.

Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,

Alone, in company, still my care hath been

To have her matched. And having now provided

A gentleman of noble parentage,

Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly ligned,

Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts,

Proportioned as one’s thought would wish a man—

And then to have a wretched puling fool,

A whining mammet, in her fortune’s tender,

To answer “I’ll not wed. I cannot love.

I am too young. I pray you, pardon me.”

But, an you will not wed, I’ll pardon you!

Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.

Look to ’t; think on ’t. I do not use to jest.

Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart; advise.

An you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend.

An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,

For, by my soul, I’ll ne’er acknowledge thee,

Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.

Trust to ’t; bethink you. I’ll not be forsworn.

So many guests invite as here are writ.

Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

How canst thou try them so?

Go, begone.

We shall be much unfurnished for this time.—

What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?

Well, he may chance to do some good on her.

A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.

How now, my headstrong, where have you been gadding?

Send for the County. Go tell him of this.

I’ll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

Why, I am glad on ’t. This is well. Stand up.

This is as ’t should be.—Let me see the County.

Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.—

Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,

All our whole city is much bound to him.

Go, nurse. Go with her. We’ll to church tomorrow.

Tush, I will stir about,

And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.

Go thou to Juliet. Help to deck up her.

I’ll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.

I’ll play the housewife for this once.—What ho!—

They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself

To County Paris, to prepare up him

Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light

Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.

Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.

The curfew bell hath rung. ’Tis three o’clock.—

Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.

Spare not for cost.

No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now

All night for lesser cause, and ne’er been sick.

A jealous hood, a jealous hood!    Now fellow,

What is there?

Make haste, make haste. Sirrah, fetch drier logs.

Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.

Mass, and well said. A merry whoreson, ha!

Thou shalt be loggerhead.  Good faith, ’tis day.

The County will be here with music straight,

For so he said he would. I hear him near.—

Nurse!—Wife! What ho!—What, nurse, I say!

Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.

I’ll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,

Make haste. The bridegroom he is come already.

Make haste, I say.

For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.

Ha, let me see her! Out, alas, she’s cold.

Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.

Life and these lips have long been separated.

Death lies on her like an untimely frost

Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

Death, that hath ta’en her hence to make me wail,

Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

Ready to go, but never to return.—

O son, the night before thy wedding day

Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,

Flower as she was, deflowerèd by him.

Death is my son-in-law; Death is my heir.

My daughter he hath wedded. I will die

And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death’s.

Despised, distressèd, hated, martyred, killed!

Uncomfortable time, why cam’st thou now

To murder, murder our solemnity?

O child! O child! My soul and not my child!

Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,

And with my child my joys are burièd.

All things that we ordainèd festival

Turn from their office to black funeral:

Our instruments to melancholy bells,

Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,

Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,

Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,

And all things change them to the contrary.

What should it be that is so shrieked abroad?

O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!

This dagger hath mista’en, for, lo, his house

Is empty on the back of Montague,

And it mis-sheathèd in my daughter’s bosom.

O brother Montague, give me thy hand.

This is my daughter’s jointure, for no more

Can I demand.

As rich shall Romeo’s by his lady’s lie,

Poor sacrifices of our enmity.

