


Part, fools!

Put up your swords. You know not what you do.

I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,

Or manage it to part these men with me.

Here were the servants of your adversary,

And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.

I drew to part them. In the instant came

The fiery Tybalt with his sword prepared,

Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,

He swung about his head and cut the winds,

Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.

While we were interchanging thrusts and blows

Came more and more and fought on part and part,

Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

Madam, an hour before the worshiped sun

Peered forth the golden window of the east,

A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,

Where underneath the grove of sycamore

That westward rooteth from this city side,

So early walking did I see your son.

Towards him I made, but he was ’ware of me

And stole into the covert of the wood.

I, measuring his affections by my own

(Which then most sought where most might not be found,

Being one too many by my weary self),

Pursued my humor, not pursuing his,

And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.

My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

Have you importuned him by any means?

See where he comes. So please you, step aside.

I’ll know his grievance or be much denied.

Good morrow, cousin.

But new struck nine.

It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo’s hours?

In love?

Of love?

Alas that love, so gentle in his view,

Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

No, coz, I rather weep.

At thy good heart’s oppression.

Soft, I will go along.

An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?

Groan? Why, no. But sadly tell me who.

I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.

A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.

By giving liberty unto thine eyes.

Examine other beauties.

I’ll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.

Tut, man, one fire burns out another’s burning;

One pain is lessened by another’s anguish.

Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning.

One desperate grief cures with another’s languish.

Take thou some new infection to thy eye,

And the rank poison of the old will die.

For what, I pray thee?

Why Romeo, art thou mad?

At this same ancient feast of Capulet’s

Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves,

With all the admirèd beauties of Verona.

Go thither, and with unattainted eye

Compare her face with some that I shall show,

And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,

Herself poised with herself in either eye;

But in that crystal scales let there be weighed

Your lady’s love against some other maid

That I will show you shining at this feast,

And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

The date is out of such prolixity.

We’ll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,

Bearing a Tartar’s painted bow of lath,

Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,

Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke

After the prompter, for our entrance.

But let them measure us by what they will.

We’ll measure them a measure and be gone.

Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in

But every man betake him to his legs.

This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.

Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

Strike, drum.

Away, begone. The sport is at the best.

Romeo, my cousin Romeo, Romeo!

He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.

Call, good Mercutio.

An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

Come, he hath hid himself among these trees

To be consorted with the humorous night.

Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

Go, then, for ’tis in vain

To seek him here that means not to be found.

Not to his father’s. I spoke with his man.

Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,

Hath sent a letter to his father’s house.

Romeo will answer it.

Nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how

he dares, being dared.

Why, what is Tybalt?

The what?

Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.

Stop there, stop there.

Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

She will indite him to some supper.

I pray thee, good Mercutio, let’s retire.

The day is hot, the Capels are abroad,

And if we meet we shall not ’scape a brawl,

For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

Am I like such a fellow?

And what to?

An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any

man should buy the fee simple of my life for an

hour and a quarter.

By my head, here comes the Capulets.

We talk here in the public haunt of men.

Either withdraw unto some private place,

Or reason coldly of your grievances,

Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.

What, art thou hurt?

O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead.

That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,

Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

Romeo, away, begone!

The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.

Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death

If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away.

Why dost thou stay?

There lies that Tybalt.

O noble prince, I can discover all

The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.

There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,

That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo’s hand did slay—

Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink

How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal

Your high displeasure. All this utterèd

With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed

Could not take truce with the unruly spleen

Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts

With piercing steel at bold Mercutio’s breast,

Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point

And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats

Cold death aside and with the other sends

It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity

Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud

“Hold, friends! Friends, part!” and swifter than his tongue

His agile arm beats down their fatal points,

And ’twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm

An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life

Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.

But by and by comes back to Romeo,

Who had but newly entertained revenge,

And to ’t they go like lightning, for ere I

Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain,

And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.

This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

