


Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,

Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel—

Will they not hear?—What ho! You men, you beasts,

That quench the fire of your pernicious rage

With purple fountains issuing from your veins:

On pain of torture, from those bloody hands

Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,

And hear the sentence of your movèd prince.

Three civil brawls bred of an airy word

By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,

Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets

And made Verona’s ancient citizens

Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments

To wield old partisans in hands as old,

Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.

If ever you disturb our streets again,

Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.

For this time all the rest depart away.

You, Capulet, shall go along with me,

And, Montague, come you this afternoon

To know our farther pleasure in this case,

To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.

Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.

Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

And for that offense

Immediately we do exile him hence.

I have an interest in your hearts’ proceeding:

My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.

But I’ll amerce you with so strong a fine

That you shall all repent the loss of mine.

I will be deaf to pleading and excuses.

Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.

Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,

Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.

Bear hence this body and attend our will.

Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

What misadventure is so early up

That calls our person from our morning rest?

What fear is this which startles in our ears?

Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

Come, Montague, for thou art early up

To see thy son and heir now early down.

Look, and thou shalt see.

Seal up the mouth of outrage for awhile,

Till we can clear these ambiguities

And know their spring, their head, their true descent,

And then will I be general of your woes

And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,

And let mischance be slave to patience.—

Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

We still have known thee for a holy man.—

Where’s Romeo’s man? What can he say to this?

Give me the letter. I will look on it.—

Where is the County’s page, that raised the watch?—

Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

This letter doth make good the Friar’s words,

Their course of love, the tidings of her death;

And here he writes that he did buy a poison

Of a poor ’pothecary, and therewithal

Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.

Where be these enemies?—Capulet, Montague,

See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,

That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love,

And I, for winking at your discords too,

Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.

A glooming peace this morning with it brings.

The sun for sorrow will not show his head.

Go hence to have more talk of these sad things.

Some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd.

For never was a story of more woe

Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

