


To cart her, rather. She’s too rough for me.—

There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?

And me too, good Lord.

Why will you mew her up,

Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,

And make her bear the penance of her tongue?

You may go to the Devil’s dam! Your gifts are

so good here’s none will hold you.—Their love is

not so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails

together and fast it fairly out. Our cake’s dough on

both sides. Farewell. Yet for the love I bear my

sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit

man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will

wish him to her father.

What’s that, I pray?

A husband? A devil!

I say “a devil.” Think’st thou, Hortensio,

though her father be very rich, any man is so very a

fool to be married to hell?

I cannot tell. But I had as lief take her dowry

with this condition: to be whipped at the high cross

every morning.

I am agreed, and would I had given him the

best horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would

thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid

the house of her. Come on.

O, very well, I have perused the note.

Hark you, sir, I’ll have them very fairly bound,

All books of love. See that at any hand,

And see you read no other lectures to her.

You understand me. Over and beside

Signior Baptista’s liberality,

I’ll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too.

And let me have them very well perfumed,

For she is sweeter than perfume itself

To whom they go to. What will you read to her?

O this learning, what a thing it is!

And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.

Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.

I promised to enquire carefully

About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,

And by good fortune I have lighted well

On this young man, for learning and behavior

Fit for her turn, well read in poetry

And other books—good ones, I warrant you.

Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.

So said, so done, is well.

Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?

No? Sayst me so, friend? What countryman?

Oh, sir, such a life with such a wife were strange.

But if you have a stomach, to ’t, i’ God’s name!

You shall have me assisting you in all.

But will you woo this wildcat?

Hortensio, hark.

This gentleman is happily arrived,

My mind presumes, for his own good and yours.

And so we will, provided that he win her.

Hark you, sir, you mean not her to—

No, if without more words you will get you hence.

But so is not she.

For this reason, if you’ll know:

That she’s the choice love of Signior Gremio.

What, this gentleman will out-talk us all!

Yea, leave that labor to great Hercules,

And let it be more than Alcides’ twelve.

Good morrow, neighbor Baptista.

You are too blunt. Go to it orderly.

Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray

Let us that are poor petitioners speak too!

Bacare, you are marvelous forward.

I doubt it not, sir. But you will curse your wooing.

Neighbor, this is a gift very grateful,

I am sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself,

that have been more kindly beholding to you than

any, freely give unto you this young scholar

that hath

been long studying at Rheims, as cunning in Greek,

Latin, and other languages as the other in music and

mathematics. His name is Cambio. Pray accept his

service.

Hark, Petruchio, she says she’ll see thee

hanged first.

Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.

Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?

No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.

But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter.

Now is the day we long have lookèd for.

I am your neighbor and was suitor first.

Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.

But thine doth fry!

Skipper, stand back. ’Tis age that nourisheth.

First, as you know, my house within the city

Is richly furnishèd with plate and gold,

Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;

My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;

In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns,

In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,

Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,

Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl,

Valance of Venice gold in needlework,

Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs

To house or housekeeping. Then, at my farm

I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,

Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,

And all things answerable to this portion.

Myself am struck in years, I must confess,

And if I die tomorrow this is hers,

If whilst I live she will be only mine.

Two thousand ducats by the year of land?

My land amounts not to so much in all.—

That she shall have, besides an argosy

That now is lying in Marcellus’ road.

What, have I choked you with an argosy?

Nay, I have offered all. I have no more,

And she can have no more than all I have.

If you like me, she shall have me and mine.

And may not young men die as well as old?

Adieu, good neighbor. Now I fear thee not.

Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool

To give thee all and in his waning age

Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy!

An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.

As willingly as e’er I came from school.

A bridegroom, say you? ’Tis a groom indeed,

A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.

Why, he’s a devil, a devil, a very fiend.

Tut, she’s a lamb, a dove, a fool to him.

I’ll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest

Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,

“Ay, by gog’s wouns!” quoth he, and swore so loud

That, all amazed, the priest let fall the book,

And as he stooped again to take it up,

This mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff

That down fell priest and book, and book and priest.

“Now, take them up,” quoth he, “if any list.”

Trembled and shook, for why he stamped and swore

As if the vicar meant to cozen him.

But after many ceremonies done,

He calls for wine. “A health!” quoth he, as if

He had been aboard, carousing to his mates

After a storm; quaffed off the muscatel

And threw the sops all in the sexton’s face,

Having no other reason

But that his beard grew thin and hungerly,

And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking.

This done, he took the bride about the neck

And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack

That at the parting all the church did echo.

And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame,

And after me I know the rout is coming.

Such a mad marriage never was before!

Hark, hark, I hear the minstrels play.

Let me entreat you.

Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.

Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.

I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.

I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.

They’re busy within. You were best knock louder.

Stay, officer. He shall not go to prison.

Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catched

in this business. I dare swear this is the

right Vincentio.

Nay, I dare not swear it.

Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.

Here’s packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!

My cake is dough, but I’ll in among the rest,

Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.

Believe me, sir, they butt together well.

Ay, and a kind one, too.

Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.

