


I’ll feeze you, in faith.

You’re a baggage! The Slys are no rogues. Look

in the chronicles. We came in with Richard Conqueror.

Therefore, paucas pallabris, let the world

slide. Sessa!

No, not a denier. Go, by Saint Jeronimy! Go to

thy cold bed and warm thee.

Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I’ll answer him

by law. I’ll not budge an inch, boy. Let him come,

and kindly.

For God’s sake, a pot of small ale.

I am Christophero Sly! Call not me “Honor” nor

“Lordship.” I ne’er drank sack in my life. An if you

give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef.

Ne’er ask me what raiment I’ll wear, for I have no

more doublets than backs, no more stockings than

legs, nor no more shoes than feet, nay sometime

more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look

through the over-leather.

What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher

Sly, old Sly’s son of Burton Heath, by birth a

peddler, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation

a bearherd, and now by present profession a

tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat alewife of Wincot,

if she know me not! If she say I am not fourteen

pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the

lying’st knave in Christendom. What, I am not

bestraught! Here’s—

Am I a lord, and have I such a lady?

Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now?

I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak,

I smell sweet savors, and I feel soft things.

Upon my life, I am a lord indeed

And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.

Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,

And once again a pot o’ the smallest ale.

These fifteen years! By my fay, a goodly nap.

But did I never speak of all that time?

Ay, the woman’s maid of the house.

Now, Lord be thanked for my good amends!

I thank thee. Thou shalt not lose by it.

Marry, I fare well, for here is cheer enough.

Where is my wife?

Are you my wife, and will not call me “husband”?

My men should call me “lord.” I am your goodman.

I know it well.—What must I call her?

“Alice Madam,” or “Joan Madam”?

Madam wife, they say that I have dreamed

And slept above some fifteen year or more.

’Tis much.—Servants, leave me and her alone.—

Madam, undress you, and come now to bed.

Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long; but

I would be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will

therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the

blood.

Marry, I will. Let them play it.

Is not a comonty a Christmas gambold or a tumbling

trick?

What, household stuff?

Well, we’ll see ’t. Come, madam wife, sit by my

side, and let the world slip. We shall ne’er be

younger.

Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely.

Comes there any more of it?

’Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady.

Would ’twere done.

