


Tranio, since for the great desire I had

To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,

I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,

The pleasant garden of great Italy,

And by my father’s love and leave am armed

With his goodwill and thy good company.

My trusty servant well approved in all,

Here let us breathe and haply institute

A course of learning and ingenious studies.

Pisa, renownèd for grave citizens,

Gave me my being, and my father first,

A merchant of great traffic through the world,

Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii.

Vincentio’s son, brought up in Florence,

It shall become to serve all hopes conceived

To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds.

And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study

Virtue, and that part of philosophy

Will I apply that treats of happiness

By virtue specially to be achieved.

Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left

And am to Padua come, as he that leaves

A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep

And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.

Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.

If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,

We could at once put us in readiness

And take a lodging fit to entertain

Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.

But stay awhile! What company is this?

But in the other’s silence do I see

Maid’s mild behavior and sobriety.

Peace, Tranio.

Hark, Tranio, thou mayst hear Minerva speak!

O Tranio, till I found it to be true,

I never thought it possible or likely.

But see, while idly I stood looking on,

I found the effect of love-in-idleness,

And now in plainness do confess to thee

That art to me as secret and as dear

As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was:

Tranio, I burn, I pine! I perish, Tranio,

If I achieve not this young modest girl.

Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst.

Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.

Gramercies, lad. Go forward. This contents;

The rest will comfort, for thy counsel’s sound.

O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,

Such as the daughter of Agenor had,

That made great Jove to humble him to her hand

When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand.

Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move,

And with her breath she did perfume the air.

Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.

Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father’s he!

But art thou not advised he took some care

To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?

I have it, Tranio!

Tell me thine first.

It is. May it be done?

Basta, content thee, for I have it full.

We have not yet been seen in any house,

Nor can we be distinguished by our faces

For man or master. Then it follows thus:

Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,

Keep house, and port, and servants, as I should.

I will some other be, some Florentine,

Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.

’Tis hatched, and shall be so. Tranio, at once

Uncase thee. Take my colored hat and cloak.

When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,

But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.

Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves,

And let me be a slave, t’ achieve that maid

Whose sudden sight hath thralled my wounded eye.

Here comes the rogue.—Sirrah, where have you been?

Sirrah, come hither. ’Tis no time to jest,

And therefore frame your manners to the time.

Your fellow, Tranio here, to save my life,

Puts my apparel and my count’nance on,

And I for my escape have put on his;

For in a quarrel since I came ashore

I killed a man and fear I was descried.

Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,

While I make way from hence to save my life.

You understand me?

And not a jot of “Tranio” in your mouth.

Tranio is changed into Lucentio.

Tranio, let’s go. One thing more rests, that

thyself execute, to make one among these wooers. If

thou ask me why, sufficeth my reasons are both

good and weighty.

Whate’er I read to her, I’ll plead for you

As for my patron, stand you so assured,

As firmly as yourself were still in place,

Yea, and perhaps with more successful words

Than you—unless you were a scholar, sir.

Well begun, Tranio.

Sir, give him head; I know he’ll prove a jade.

Fiddler, forbear. You grow too forward, sir.

Have you so soon forgot the entertainment

Her sister Katherine welcomed you withal?

Preposterous ass, that never read so far

To know the cause why music was ordained.

Was it not to refresh the mind of man

After his studies or his usual pain?

Then give me leave to read philosophy,

And, while I pause, serve in your harmony.

That will be never. Tune your instrument.

Here, madam:

Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus,

Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.

Hic ibat, as I told you before, Simois, I am

Lucentio, hic est, son unto Vincentio of Pisa,

Sigeia tellus, disguised thus to get your love, Hic

steterat, and that “Lucentio” that comes a-wooing,

Priami, is my man Tranio, regia, bearing my port,

celsa senis, that we might beguile the old pantaloon.

Spit in the hole, man, and tune

again.

All but the bass.

Mistrust it not, for sure Aeacides

Was Ajax, called so from his grandfather.

Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait

And watch withal, for, but I be deceived,

Our fine musician groweth amorous.

Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.

Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster

Doth watch Bianca’s steps so narrowly,

’Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage,

Which, once performed, let all the world say no,

I’ll keep mine own despite of all the world.

Mistress, what’s your opinion of your sister?

Now mistress, profit you in what you read?

I read that I profess, The Art to Love.

While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart.

Then we are rid of Litio.

And what of him, Tranio?

What sayst thou, Biondello?

Biondello, what of that?

I pray thee, moralize them.

And what of him?

And then?

And what of all this?

Hear’st thou, Biondello?

I may, and will, if she be so contented.

She will be pleased. Then wherefore should I doubt?

Hap what hap may, I’ll roundly go about her.

It shall go hard if “Cambio” go without her.

I fly, Biondello. But they may chance to

need thee at home. Therefore leave us.

Pardon, sweet father.

Here’s Lucentio,

Right son to the right Vincentio,

That have by marriage made thy daughter mine

While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.

Love wrought these miracles. Bianca’s love

Made me exchange my state with Tranio,

While he did bear my countenance in the town,

And happily I have arrivèd at the last

Unto the wishèd haven of my bliss.

What Tranio did, myself enforced him to.

Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.

Look not pale, Bianca. Thy father will not

frown.

At last, though long, our jarring notes agree,

And time it is when raging war is done

To smile at ’scapes and perils overblown.

My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,

While I with selfsame kindness welcome thine.

Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina,

And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,

Feast with the best, and welcome to my house.

My banquet is to close our stomachs up

After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down,

For now we sit to chat as well as eat.

I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.

Twenty crowns.

A hundred, then.

That will I.

Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.

I’ll have no halves. I’ll bear it all myself.

How now, what news?

Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.

I would your duty were as foolish too.

The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,

Hath cost me a hundred crowns since suppertime.

Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha ’t.

But a harsh hearing when women are froward.

’Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.

