


Sir Proteus, ’save you. Saw you my master?

Twenty to one, then, he is shipped already,

And I have played the sheep in losing him.

You conclude that my master is a shepherd,

then, and I a sheep?

Why, then my horns are his horns, whether I

wake or sleep.

This proves me still a sheep.

Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance.

The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the

sheep the shepherd; but I seek my master, and my

master seeks not me. Therefore I am no sheep.

Such another proof will make me cry “baa.”

Ay, sir. I, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her, a

laced mutton, and she, a laced mutton, gave me, a

lost mutton, nothing for my labor.

If the ground be overcharged, you were best

stick her.

Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for

carrying your letter.

From a pound to a pin? Fold it over and over,

’Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover.

Ay.

You mistook, sir. I say she did nod, and you ask

me if she did nod, and I say “ay.”

Now you have taken the pains to set it together,

take it for your pains.

Well, I perceive I must be fain to bear with you.

Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly, having nothing

but the word “noddy” for my pains.

And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.

Open your purse, that the money and the matter

may be both at once delivered.

Truly, sir, I think you’ll

hardly win her.

Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her, no,

not so much as a ducat for delivering your letter.

And being so hard to me that brought your mind, I

fear she’ll prove as hard to you in telling your mind.

Give her no token but stones, for she’s as hard as

steel.

No, not so much as “Take this for thy pains.”

To testify your bounty, I thank you, you have

testerned me. In requital whereof, henceforth

carry your letters yourself. And so, sir, I’ll commend

you to my master.

Sir, your glove.

Why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.

Madam Sylvia! Madam Sylvia!

She is not within hearing, sir.

Your Worship, sir, or else I mistook.

And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.

She that your Worship loves?

Marry, by these special marks: first, you have

learned, like Sir Proteus, to wreathe your arms like

a malcontent; to relish a love song like a robin

redbreast; to walk alone like one that had the

pestilence; to sigh like a schoolboy that had lost his

ABC; to weep like a young wench that had buried

her grandam; to fast like one that takes diet; to

watch like one that fears robbing; to speak puling

like a beggar at Hallowmas. You were wont, when

you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you walked,

to walk like one of the lions. When you fasted, it was

presently after dinner; when you looked sadly, it

was for want of money. And now you are metamorphosed

with a mistress, that when I look on you, I

can hardly think you my master.

They are all perceived without you.

Without you? Nay, that’s certain, for without

you were so simple, none else would. But you are so

without these follies, that these follies are within

you and shine through you like the water in an

urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a

physician to comment on your malady.

She that you gaze on so as she sits at supper?

Why, sir, I know her not.

Is she not hard-favored, sir?

Sir, I know that well enough.

That she is not so fair as, of you, well-favored.

That’s because the one is painted, and the other

out of all count.

Marry, sir, so painted to make her fair, that no

man counts of her beauty.

You never saw her since she was deformed.

Ever since you loved her.

If you love her, you cannot see her.

Because love is blind. O, that you had mine eyes,

or your own eyes had the lights they were wont to

have when you chid at Sir Proteus for going

ungartered!

Your own present folly and her passing deformity;

for he, being in love, could not see to garter his

hose, and you, being in love, cannot see to put on

your hose.

True, sir, I was in love with my bed. I thank you,

you swinged me for my love, which makes me the

bolder to chide you for yours.

I would you were set, so your affection would

cease.

And have you?

Are they not lamely writ?

O excellent motion! O exceeding puppet!

Now will he interpret to her.

O, give ye good ev’n! Here’s a million of

manners.

He should give her interest, and she

gives it him.

And yet you will; and yet another “yet.”

O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible

As a nose on a man’s face, or a weathercock on a steeple!

My master sues to her, and she hath taught her suitor,

He being her pupil, to become her tutor.

O excellent device! Was there ever heard a better?

That my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?

Nay, I was rhyming. ’Tis you that have the

reason.

To be a spokesman from Madam Sylvia.

To yourself. Why, she woos you by a figure.

By a letter, I should say.

What need she when she hath made you write

to yourself? Why, do you not perceive the jest?

No believing you indeed, sir. But did you perceive

her earnest?

Why, she hath given you a letter.

And that letter hath she delivered, and there an

end.

I’ll warrant you, ’tis as well.

For often have you writ to her, and she, in modesty

Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply,

Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover,

Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover.

All this I speak in print, for in print I found it. Why

muse you, sir? ’Tis dinnertime.

Ay, but hearken, sir, though the chameleon love

can feed on the air, I am one that am nourished by

my victuals and would fain have meat. O, be not like

your mistress! Be moved, be moved.

Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.

Not of you.

’Twere good you knocked him.

Lance, by mine honesty, welcome to Padua.

Come on, you madcap. I’ll to the alehouse with

you presently, where, for one shot of five pence,

thou shalt have five thousand welcomes. But, sirrah,

how did thy master part with Madam Julia?

But shall she marry him?

How then? Shall he marry her?

What, are they broken?

Why then, how stands the matter with them?

What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.

What thou sayst?

It stands under thee indeed.

But tell me true, will ’t be a match?

The conclusion is, then, that it will.

’Tis well that I get it so. But, Lance, how sayst

thou that my master is become a notable lover?

Than how?

Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistak’st me.

I tell thee, my master is become a hot lover.

Why?

At thy service.

How now, Signior Lance? What news with your

Mastership?

Well, your old vice still: mistake the word. What

news, then, in your paper?

Why, man? How black?

Let me read them.

Thou liest. I can.

Marry, the son of my grandfather.

Come, fool, come. Try me in thy paper.

Imprimis, She can milk.

Item, She brews good ale.

Item, She can sew.

Item, She can knit.

Item, She can wash and scour.

Item, She can spin.

Item, She hath many nameless virtues.

Here follow her vices.

Item, She is not to be kissed fasting in respect of

her breath.

Item, She hath a sweet mouth.

Item, She doth talk in her sleep.

Item, She is slow in words.

Item, She is proud.

Item, She hath no teeth.

Item, She is curst.

Item, She will often praise her liquor.

Item, She is too liberal.

Item, She hath more hair than wit, and more

faults than hairs, and more wealth than faults.

Item, She hath more hair than wit.

And more faults than hairs.

And more wealth than faults.

What then?

For me?

And must I go to him?

Why didst not tell me

sooner? Pox of your love letters!

Sir, we are undone; these are the villains

That all the travelers do fear so much.

Master, be one of them. It’s an honorable kind

of thievery.

