


But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,

Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?

Of all the fair resort of gentlemen

That every day with parle encounter me,

In thy opinion which is worthiest love?

What think’st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?

What think’st thou of the rich Mercatio?

What think’st thou of the gentle Proteus?

How now? What means this passion at his name?

Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?

Your reason?

And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?

Why, he of all the rest hath never moved me.

His little speaking shows his love but small.

They do not love that do not show their love.

I would I knew his mind.

“To Julia.”—Say from whom.

Say, say who gave it thee.

Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker!

Dare you presume to harbor wanton lines?

To whisper and conspire against my youth?

Now trust me, ’tis an office of great worth,

And you an officer fit for the place.

There, take the paper; see it be returned,

Or else return no more into my sight.

Will you be gone?

And yet I would I had o’erlooked the letter.

It were a shame to call her back again

And pray her to a fault for which I chid her.

What fool is she that knows I am a maid

And would not force the letter to my view,

Since maids in modesty say “no” to that

Which they would have the profferer construe “ay”!

Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love

That like a testy babe will scratch the nurse

And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod!

How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,

When willingly I would have had her here!

How angerly I taught my brow to frown,

When inward joy enforced my heart to smile!

My penance is to call Lucetta back

And ask remission for my folly past.—

What ho, Lucetta!

Is ’t near dinner time?

What is ’t that you took up so gingerly?

Why didst thou stoop, then?

And is that paper nothing?

Then let it lie for those that it concerns.

Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.

As little by such toys as may be possible.

Best sing it to the tune of Light o’ Love.

Heavy? Belike it hath some burden then?

And why not you?

Let’s see your song. How now, minion!

You do not?

You, minion, are too saucy.

The mean is drowned with your unruly bass.

This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.

Here is a coil with protestation.

Go, get you gone, and let the papers lie.

You would be fing’ring them to anger me.

Nay, would I were so angered with the same!

O hateful hands, to tear such loving words!

Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey

And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!

I’ll kiss each several paper for amends.

Look, here is writ “kind Julia.” Unkind Julia,

As in revenge of thy ingratitude,

I throw thy name against the bruising stones,

Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.

And here is writ “love-wounded Proteus.”

Poor wounded name, my bosom as a bed

Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly healed,

And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.

But twice or thrice was “Proteus” written down.

Be calm, good wind. Blow not a word away

Till I have found each letter in the letter

Except mine own name. That some whirlwind bear

Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock

And throw it thence into the raging sea.

Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ:

“Poor forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus,

To the sweet Julia.” That I’ll tear away—

And yet I will not, sith so prettily

He couples it to his complaining names.

Thus will I fold them one upon another.

Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.

Well, let us go.

If you respect them, best to take them up.

I see you have a month’s mind to them.

Come, come, will ’t please you go?

I must where is no remedy.

If you turn not, you will return the sooner.

Keep this remembrance for thy Julia’s sake.

And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.

Counsel, Lucetta. Gentle girl, assist me;

And ev’n in kind love I do conjure thee—

Who art the table wherein all my thoughts

Are visibly charactered and engraved—

To lesson me and tell me some good mean

How with my honor I may undertake

A journey to my loving Proteus.

A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary

To measure kingdoms with his feeble steps;

Much less shall she that hath Love’s wings to fly,

And when the flight is made to one so dear,

Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus.

O, know’st thou not his looks are my soul’s food?

Pity the dearth that I have pinèd in

By longing for that food so long a time.

Didst thou but know the inly touch of love,

Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow

As seek to quench the fire of love with words.

The more thou damm’st it up, the more it burns.

The current that with gentle murmur glides,

Thou know’st, being stopped, impatiently doth rage,

But when his fair course is not hinderèd,

He makes sweet music with th’ enameled stones,

Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge

He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;

And so by many winding nooks he strays

With willing sport to the wild ocean.

Then let me go and hinder not my course.

I’ll be as patient as a gentle stream

And make a pastime of each weary step

Till the last step have brought me to my love,

And there I’ll rest as after much turmoil

A blessèd soul doth in Elysium.

Not like a woman, for I would prevent

The loose encounters of lascivious men.

Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds

As may beseem some well-reputed page.

No, girl, I’ll knit it up in silken strings

With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots.

To be fantastic may become a youth

Of greater time than I shall show to be.

That fits as well as “Tell me, good my lord,

What compass will you wear your farthingale?”

Why, ev’n what fashion thou best likes, Lucetta.

Out, out, Lucetta. That will be ill-favored.

Lucetta, as thou lov’st me, let me have

What thou think’st meet and is most mannerly.

But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me

For undertaking so unstaid a journey?

I fear me it will make me scandalized.

Nay, that I will not.

That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear.

A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears,

And instances of infinite of love

Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.

Base men that use them to so base effect!

But truer stars did govern Proteus’ birth.

His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,

His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,

His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,

His heart as far from fraud as heaven from Earth.

Now, as thou lov’st me, do him not that wrong

To bear a hard opinion of his truth.

Only deserve my love by loving him.

And presently go with me to my chamber

To take a note of what I stand in need of

To furnish me upon my longing journey.

All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,

My goods, my lands, my reputation.

Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.

Come, answer not, but to it presently.

I am impatient of my tarriance.

Marry, mine host, because I

cannot be merry.

But shall I hear him speak?

That will be music.

Is he among these?

You mistake. The musician likes me

not.

He plays false, father.

Not so; but yet so false that he

grieves my very heart-strings.

Ay, I would I were deaf; it makes

me have a slow heart.

Not a whit when it jars so.

Ay; that change is the spite.

I would always have one play but one thing.

But, host, doth this Sir Proteus, that we talk on,

Often resort unto this gentlewoman?

Where is Lance?

Peace. Stand aside. The company

parts.

’Twere false if I should speak it,

For I am sure she is not burièd.

He heard not that.

If ’twere a substance you would sure deceive it

And make it but a shadow, as I am.

Host, will you go?

Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus?

Not so; but it hath been the longest night

That e’er I watched, and the most heaviest.

In what you please. I’ll do what I can.

It seems you loved not her, to leave her token.

She is dead belike?

Alas!

I cannot choose but pity her.

Because methinks that she loved you as well

As you do love your lady Sylvia.

She dreams on him that has forgot her love;

You dote on her that cares not for your love.

’Tis pity love should be so contrary,

And thinking on it makes me cry “Alas.”

How many women would do such a message?

Alas, poor Proteus, thou hast entertained

A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.

Alas, poor fool, why do I pity him

That with his very heart despiseth me?

Because he loves her, he despiseth me;

Because I love him, I must pity him.

This ring I gave him when he parted from me,

To bind him to remember my good will;

And now am I, unhappy messenger,

To plead for that which I would not obtain,

To carry that which I would have refused,

To praise his faith, which I would have dispraised.

I am my master’s true confirmèd love,

But cannot be true servant to my master

Unless I prove false traitor to myself.

Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly

As—Heaven it knows!—I would not have him speed.

Gentlewoman, good day. I pray you be my mean

To bring me where to speak with Madam Sylvia.

If you be she, I do entreat your patience

To hear me speak the message I am sent on.

From my master, Sir Proteus,

madam.

Ay, madam.

Madam, please you peruse this letter.

Pardon me, madam, I have unadvised

Delivered you a paper that I should not.

This is the letter to your Ladyship.

It may not be; good madam, pardon me.

Madam, he sends your Ladyship this ring.

She thanks you.

I thank you, madam, that you tender her;

Poor gentlewoman, my master wrongs her much.

Almost as well as I do know myself.

To think upon her woes, I do protest

That I have wept a hundred several times.

I think she doth, and that’s her cause of sorrow.

She hath been fairer, madam, than she is;

When she did think my master loved her well,

She, in my judgment, was as fair as you.

But since she did neglect her looking-glass

And threw her sun-expelling mask away,

The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks

And pinched the lily tincture of her face,

That now she is become as black as I.

About my stature; for at Pentecost,

When all our pageants of delight were played,

Our youth got me to play the woman’s part,

And I was trimmed in Madam Julia’s gown,

Which served me as fit, by all men’s judgments,

As if the garment had been made for me;

Therefore I know she is about my height.

And at that time I made her weep agood,

For I did play a lamentable part;

Madam, ’twas Ariadne, passioning

For Theseus’ perjury and unjust flight,

Which I so lively acted with my tears

That my poor mistress, movèd therewithal,

Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead

If I in thought felt not her very sorrow.

And she shall thank you for ’t if e’er you know her.

A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful.

I hope my master’s suit will be but cold,

Since she respects my mistress’ love so much.—

Alas, how love can trifle with itself!

Here is her picture; let me see. I think

If I had such a tire, this face of mine

Were full as lovely as is this of hers;

And yet the painter flattered her a little,

Unless I flatter with myself too much.

Her hair is auburn; mine is perfect yellow;

If that be all the difference in his love,

I’ll get me such a colored periwig.

Her eyes are gray as glass, and so are mine.

Ay, but her forehead’s low, and mine’s as high.

What should it be that he respects in her

But I can make respective in myself

If this fond Love were not a blinded god?

Come, shadow, come, and take this shadow up,

For ’tis thy rival. O, thou senseless form,

Thou shalt be worshipped, kissed, loved, and adored;

And were there sense in his idolatry,

My substance should be statue in thy stead.

I’ll use thee kindly for thy mistress’ sake,

That used me so, or else, by Jove I vow,

I should have scratched out your unseeing eyes

To make my master out of love with thee.

But love will not be spurred to what it loathes.

’Tis true, such pearls as put out ladies’ eyes,

For I had rather wink than look on them.

But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.

She needs not when she knows it cowardice.

True, from a gentleman to a fool.

That such an ass should owe them.

Here comes the Duke.

And I will follow, more to cross that love

Than hate for Sylvia, that is gone for love.

And me, when he approacheth to your presence.

O me unhappy!

O, good sir, my master charged

me to deliver a ring to Madam Sylvia, which out of

my neglect was never done.

Here ’tis; this is it.

O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook.

This is the ring you sent to Sylvia.

And Julia herself did give it me,

And Julia herself hath brought it hither.

Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths

And entertained ’em deeply in her heart.

How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root!

O, Proteus, let this habit make thee blush.

Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me

Such an immodest raiment, if shame live

In a disguise of love.

It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,

Women to change their shapes than men their minds.

And I mine.

