


You see, my lord, how ample you’re beloved.

So are we all.

Who, the Lord Timon? He is my very good

friend and an honorable gentleman.

Fie, no, do not believe it. He cannot want for

money.

How?

What a strange case was that! Now, before the

gods, I am ashamed on ’t. Denied that honorable

man? There was very little honor showed in ’t. For

my own part, I must needs confess I have received

some small kindnesses from him, as money, plate,

jewels, and suchlike trifles, nothing comparing to

his; yet had he mistook him and sent to me, I

should ne’er have denied his occasion fifty talents.

Servilius. You are kindly met, sir. Fare thee

well. Commend me to thy honorable virtuous lord,

my very exquisite friend.

Ha! What has he sent? I am so much endeared

to that lord; he’s ever sending. How shall I thank

him, think’st thou? And what has he sent now?

I know his Lordship is but merry with me.

He cannot want fifty-five hundred talents.

Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?

What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish

myself against such a good time, when I might ha’

shown myself honorable! How unluckily it happened

that I should purchase the day before for a

little part, and undo a great deal of honor! Servilius,

now before the gods, I am not able to do—the

more beast, I say!—I was sending to use Lord

Timon myself, these gentlemen can witness; but I

would not for the wealth of Athens I had done ’t

now. Commend me bountifully to his good Lordship,

and I hope his Honor will conceive the fairest

of me, because I have no power to be kind. And tell

him this from me: I count it one of my greatest

afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an honorable

gentleman. Good Servilius, will you

befriend me so far as to use mine own words to

him?

I’ll look you out a good turn, Servilius.

True, as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed,

And he that’s once denied will hardly speed.

