
At all times alike

Men are not still the same. ’Twas time and griefs

That framed him thus. Time, with his fairer hand

Offering the fortunes of his former days,

The former man may make him. Bring us to him,

And chance it as it may.

They confess

Toward thee forgetfulness too general gross;

Which now the public body, which doth seldom

Play the recanter, feeling in itself

A lack of Timon’s aid, hath sense withal

Of it own fall, restraining aid to Timon,

And send forth us to make their sorrowed render,

Together with a recompense more fruitful

Than their offense can weigh down by the dram—

Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth

As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs

And write in thee the figures of their love,

Ever to read them thine.

And shakes his threat’ning sword

Against the walls of Athens.

And enter in our ears like great triumphers

In their applauding gates.

Our hope in him is dead. Let us return

And strain what other means is left unto us

In our dear peril.

So did we woo

Transformèd Timon to our city’s love

By humble message and by promised means.

We were not all unkind, nor all deserve

The common stroke of war.

Nor are they living

Who were the motives that you first went out.

Shame, that they wanted cunning, in excess

Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,

Into our city with thy banners spread.

By decimation and a tithèd death,

If thy revenges hunger for that food

Which nature loathes, take thou the destined tenth

And, by the hazard of the spotted die,

Let die the spotted.

What thou wilt,

Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile

Than hew to ’t with thy sword.

Throw thy glove,

Or any token of thine honor else,

That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress

And not as our confusion, all thy powers

Shall make their harbor in our town till we

Have sealed thy full desire.

’Tis most nobly spoken.

