


Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow—

When thou art Timon’s dog, and these knaves honest.

Are they not Athenians?

Then I repent not.

Thou know’st I do. I called thee by thy

name.

Of nothing so much as that I am not like

Timon.

To knock out an honest Athenian’s brains.

Right, if doing nothing be death by th’ law.

The best, for the innocence.

He wrought better that made the painter,

and yet he’s but a filthy piece of work.

Thy mother’s of my generation. What’s

she, if I be a dog?

No. I eat not lords.

O, they eat lords. So they come by great

bellies.

So thou apprehend’st it. Take it for thy

labor.

Not so well as plain-dealing, which will

not cost a man a doit.

Not worth my thinking.—How now, poet?

Thou liest.

Yes.

Art not a poet?

Then thou liest. Look in thy last work,

where thou hast feigned him a worthy fellow.

Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee

for thy labor. He that loves to be flattered is worthy

o’ th’ flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!

E’en as Apemantus does now—hate a lord

with my heart.

Ay.

That I had no angry wit to be a lord.—Art

not thou a merchant?

Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not.

Traffic’s thy god, and thy god confound

thee!

So, so, there!

Aches contract and starve your supple joints!

That there should be small love amongst these sweet knaves,

And all this courtesy! The strain of man’s bred out

Into baboon and monkey.

Time to be honest.

The most accursèd thou, that still omit’st it.

Ay, to see meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools.

Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.

Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to give thee none.

No, I will do nothing at thy bidding.

Make thy requests to thy friend.

I will fly, like a dog, the heels o’ th’ ass.

Ho, ho, “confessed it”? Hanged it, have you not?

No, you shall not make me welcome.

I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.

Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon. I

come to observe; I give thee warning on ’t.

I scorn thy meat. ’Twould choke me, for I

should ne’er flatter thee. O you gods,

what a number of men eats Timon, and he sees ’em

not! It grieves me to see so many dip their meat in

one man’s blood; and all the madness is, he cheers

them up too.

I wonder men dare trust themselves with men.

Methinks they should invite them without knives.

Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.

There’s much example for ’t. The fellow that sits

next him, now parts bread with him, pledges the

breath of him in a divided draft, is the readiest

man to kill him. ’T ’as been proved. If I were a huge

man, I should fear to drink at meals,

Lest they should spy my wind-pipe’s dangerous notes.

Great men should drink with harness on their throats.

“Flow this way”? A brave fellow.

He keeps his tides well. Those healths will make

thee and thy state look ill, Timon.

Here’s that which is too weak to be a sinner,

Honest water, which ne’er left man i’ th’ mire.

This and my food are equals. There’s no odds.

Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.

Immortal gods, I crave no pelf.

I pray for no man but myself.

Grant I may never prove so fond

To trust man on his oath or bond,

Or a harlot for her weeping,

Or a dog that seems a-sleeping,

Or a keeper with my freedom,

Or my friends if I should need ’em.

Amen. So fall to ’t.

Rich men sin, and I eat root.

Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!

Would all those flatterers were

thine enemies, then, that then thou mightst kill

’em and bid me to ’em.

Thou weep’st to make them drink,

Timon.

Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.

Much!

Hoy-day!

What a sweep of vanity comes this way.

They dance? They are madwomen.

Like madness is the glory of this life

As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.

We make ourselves fools to disport ourselves

And spend our flatteries to drink those men

Upon whose age we void it up again

With poisonous spite and envy.

Who lives that’s not depravèd or depraves?

Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves

Of their friends’ gift?

I should fear those that dance before me now

Would one day stamp upon me. ’T ’as been done.

Men shut their doors against a setting sun.

Faith, for the worst is filthy and

would not hold taking, I doubt me.

What a coil’s here,

Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!

I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums

That are given for ’em. Friendship’s full of dregs.

Methinks false hearts should never have sound legs.

Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court’sies.

No, I’ll nothing, for if I should be bribed

too, there would be none left to rail upon thee, and

then thou wouldst sin the faster. Thou giv’st so

long, Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself

in paper shortly. What needs these feasts, pomps,

and vainglories?

So. Thou wilt not hear me now, thou shalt

not then. I’ll lock thy heaven from thee.

O, that men’s ears should be

To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!

Dost dialogue with thy shadow?

No, ’tis to thyself. Come

away.

No, thou stand’st single; thou ’rt not on

him yet.

He last asked the question. Poor rogues

and usurers’ men, bawds between gold and want.

Asses.

That you ask me what you are, and do not

know yourselves.—Speak to ’em, Fool.

Good. Gramercy.

Would I had a rod in my mouth that I

might answer thee profitably.

Canst not read?

There will little learning die, then, that

day thou art hanged. This is to Lord Timon, this to

Alcibiades. Go. Thou wast born a bastard, and

thou ’lt die a bawd.

E’en so thou outrunn’st grace.—Fool, I

will go with you to Lord Timon’s.

If Timon stay at home.—You three serve

three usurers?

So would I—as good a trick as ever hangman

served thief.

Do it then, that we may account thee a

whoremaster and a knave, which notwithstanding,

thou shalt be no less esteemed.

That answer might have become Apemantus.

Come with me, fool, come.

I was directed hither. Men report

Thou dost affect my manners and dost use them.

This is in thee a nature but infected,

A poor unmanly melancholy sprung

From change of future. Why this spade? This place?

This slavelike habit and these looks of care?

Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,

Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot

That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods

By putting on the cunning of a carper.

Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive

By that which has undone thee. Hinge thy knee,

And let his very breath whom thou ’lt observe

Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain,

And call it excellent. Thou wast told thus.

Thou gav’st thine ears, like tapsters that bade welcome,

To knaves and all approachers. ’Tis most just

That thou turn rascal. Had’st thou wealth again,

Rascals should have ’t. Do not assume my likeness.

Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself—

A madman so long, now a fool. What, think’st

That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,

Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist trees,

That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels

And skip when thou point’st out? Will the cold brook,

Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste

To cure thy o’ernight’s surfeit? Call the creatures

Whose naked natures live in all the spite

Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhousèd trunks,

To the conflicting elements exposed,

Answer mere nature. Bid them flatter thee.

O, thou shalt find—

I love thee better now than e’er I did.

Why?

I flatter not but say thou art a caitiff.

To vex thee.

Ay.

If thou didst put this sour cold habit on

To castigate thy pride, ’twere well, but thou

Dost it enforcedly. Thou ’dst courtier be again

Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery

Outlives incertain pomp, is crowned before;

The one is filling still, never complete,

The other at high wish. Best state, contentless,

Hath a distracted and most wretched being,

Worse than the worst, content.

Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.

Art thou proud yet?

I, that I was no prodigal.

Here, I will mend thy feast.

So I shall mend mine own by th’ lack of thine.

What wouldst thou have to Athens?

Here is no use for gold.

Where liest a-nights, Timon?

Where my stomach finds meat, or rather

where I eat it.

Where wouldst thou send it?

The middle of humanity thou never

knewest, but the extremity of both ends. When

thou wast in thy gilt and thy perfume, they

mocked thee for too much curiosity. In thy rags

thou know’st none, but art despised for the contrary.

There’s a medlar for thee. Eat it.

Dost hate a medlar?

An thou ’dst hated meddlers sooner, thou

shouldst have loved thyself better now. What man

didst thou ever know unthrift that was beloved

after his means?

Myself.

What things in the world canst thou nearest

compare to thy flatterers?

Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.

Ay, Timon.

If thou couldst please me with speaking to

me, thou mightst have hit upon it here. The commonwealth

of Athens is become a forest of beasts.

Yonder comes a poet and a painter. The

plague of company light upon thee! I will fear to

catch it and give way. When I know not what else

to do, I’ll see thee again.

Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.

A plague on thee! Thou art too bad to curse.

There is no leprosy but what thou speak’st.

I would my tongue could rot them off!

Would thou wouldst burst!

Beast!

Toad!

Would ’twere so!

But not till I am dead. I’ll say thou ’st gold;

Thou wilt be thronged to shortly.

Ay.

Live and love thy misery.

More things like men.—Eat, Timon, and abhor them.

