
Bring us to his cave.

It is our part and promise to th’ Athenians

To speak with Timon.

Worthy Timon—

The Senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.

O, forget

What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.

The Senators with one consent of love

Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought

On special dignities which vacant lie

For thy best use and wearing.

Therefore, so please thee to return with us

And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take

The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks;

Allowed with absolute power, and thy good name

Live with authority. So soon we shall drive back

Of Alcibiades th’ approaches wild,

Who like a boar too savage doth root up

His country’s peace.

Therefore, Timon—

We speak in vain.

That’s well spoke.

These words become your lips as they pass through them.

I like this well. He will return again.

His discontents are unremovably

Coupled to nature.

It requires swift foot.

No talk of Timon; nothing of him expect.

The enemy’s drum is heard, and fearful scouring

Doth choke the air with dust. In, and prepare.

Ours is the fall, I fear, our foe’s the snare.

Noble and young,

When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,

Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,

We sent to thee to give thy rages balm,

To wipe out our ingratitude with loves

Above their quantity.

These walls of ours

Were not erected by their hands from whom

You have received your grief, nor are they such

That these great towers, trophies, and schools should fall

For private faults in them.

All have not offended.

For those that were, it is not square to take,

On those that are, revenge. Crimes, like lands,

Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,

Bring in thy ranks but leave without thy rage.

Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin

Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall

With those that have offended. Like a shepherd

Approach the fold and cull th’ infected forth,

But kill not all together.

Set but thy foot

Against our rampired gates and they shall ope,

So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before

To say thou ’lt enter friendly.

’Tis most nobly spoken.

