


Good day, sir.

I have not seen you long. How goes the world?

Ay, that’s well known.

But what particular rarity, what strange,

Which manifold record not matches? See,

Magic of bounty, all these spirits thy power

Hath conjured to attend. I know the merchant.

When we for recompense have praised the vile,

It stains the glory in that happy verse

Which aptly sings the good.

A thing slipped idly from me.

Our poesy is as a gum which oozes

From whence ’tis nourished. The fire i’ th’ flint

Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame

Provokes itself and, like the current, flies

Each bound it chases. What have you there?

Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.

Let’s see your piece.

So ’tis. This comes off well and excellent.

Admirable! How this grace

Speaks his own standing! What a mental power

This eye shoots forth! How big imagination

Moves in this lip! To th’ dumbness of the gesture

One might interpret.

I will say of it,

It tutors nature. Artificial strife

Lives in these touches livelier than life.

The senators of Athens, happy men.

You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors.

I have in this rough work shaped out a man

Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug

With amplest entertainment. My free drift

Halts not particularly but moves itself

In a wide sea of wax. No leveled malice

Infects one comma in the course I hold,

But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,

Leaving no tract behind.

I will unbolt to you.

You see how all conditions, how all minds,

As well of glib and slipp’ry creatures as

Of grave and austere quality, tender down

Their services to Lord Timon. His large fortune,

Upon his good and gracious nature hanging,

Subdues and properties to his love and tendance

All sorts of hearts—yea, from the glass-faced flatterer

To Apemantus, that few things loves better

Than to abhor himself; even he drops down

The knee before him and returns in peace

Most rich in Timon’s nod.

Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill

Feigned Fortune to be throned. The base o’ th’ mount

Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of natures

That labor on the bosom of this sphere

To propagate their states. Amongst them all

Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fixed,

One do I personate of Lord Timon’s frame,

Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her,

Whose present grace to present slaves and servants

Translates his rivals.

Nay, sir, but hear me on.

All those which were his fellows but of late,

Some better than his value, on the moment

Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,

Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,

Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him

Drink the free air.

When Fortune in her shift and change of mood

Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants,

Which labored after him to the mountain’s top

Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,

Not one accompanying his declining foot.

Vouchsafe my labor, and long live your Lordship.

How now, philosopher?

Art not one?

Then I lie not.

Yes.

That’s not feigned. He is so.

What’s to be thought of him? Does the rumor

hold for true that he’s so full of gold?

Then this breaking of his has been but a try for

his friends?

What have you now to present unto him?

I must serve him so too—tell him of an intent

that’s coming toward him.

I am thinking what I shall say I have provided

for him. It must be a personating of himself, a

satire against the softness of prosperity, with a discovery

of the infinite flatteries that follow youth

and opulency.

Nay, let’s seek him.

Then do we sin against our own estate

When we may profit meet and come too late.

Hail, worthy Timon.

Sir,

Having often of your open bounty tasted,

Hearing you were retired, your friends fall’n off,

Whose thankless natures—O, abhorrèd spirits!

Not all the whips of heaven are large enough—

What, to you,

Whose starlike nobleness gave life and influence

To their whole being? I am rapt and cannot cover

The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude

With any size of words.

What we can do we’ll do to do you service.

Beseech your Honor

To make it known to us.

Most thankfully, my lord.

Doubt it not, worthy lord.

Do we, my lord?

Nor I.

Name them, my lord, let ’s know them.

