


Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome!

Alarbus goes to rest and we survive

To tremble under Titus’ threat’ning look.

Then, madam, stand resolved, but hope withal

The selfsame gods that armed the Queen of Troy

With opportunity of sharp revenge

Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent

May favor Tamora the Queen of Goths

(When Goths were Goths, and Tamora was queen)

To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.

Chiron, thy years wants wit, thy wits wants edge

And manners, to intrude where I am graced,

And may, for aught thou knowest, affected be.

Why, boy, although our mother, unadvised,

Gave you a dancing rapier by your side,

Are you so desperate grown to threat your friends?

Go to. Have your lath glued within your sheath

Till you know better how to handle it.

Ay, boy, grow you so brave?

Not I, till I have sheathed

My rapier in his bosom, and withal

Thrust those reproachful speeches down his throat

That he hath breathed in my dishonor here.

Youngling, learn thou to make some meaner choice.

Lavinia is thine elder brother’s hope.

Why makes thou it so strange?

She is a woman, therefore may be wooed;

She is a woman, therefore may be won;

She is Lavinia, therefore must be loved.

What, man, more water glideth by the mill

Than wots the miller of, and easy it is

Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know.

Though Bassianus be the Emperor’s brother,

Better than he have worn Vulcan’s badge.

Then why should he despair that knows to court it

With words, fair looks, and liberality?

What, hast not thou full often struck a doe

And borne her cleanly by the keeper’s nose?

Aaron, thou hast hit it.

Nor me, so I were one.

Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream

To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits,

Per Stygia, per manes vehor.

Chiron, we hunt not, we, with horse nor hound,

But hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground.

How now, dear sovereign and our gracious mother,

Why doth your Highness look so pale and wan?

This is a witness that I am thy son.

Stay, madam, here is more belongs to her.

First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw.

This minion stood upon her chastity,

Upon her nuptial vow, her loyalty,

And with that painted hope braves your mightiness;

And shall she carry this unto her grave?

Listen, fair madam. Let it be your glory

To see her tears, but be your heart to them

As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.

Away, for thou hast stayed us here too long!

So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak,

Who ’twas that cut thy tongue and ravished thee.

See how with signs and tokens she can scrowl.

She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash;

And so let’s leave her to her silent walks.

If thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord.

Gramercy, lovely Lucius. What’s the news?

What’s here? A scroll, and written round about.

Let’s see:

“Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,

Non eget Mauri iaculis, nec arcu.”

But me more good to see so great a lord

Basely insinuate and send us gifts.

I would we had a thousand Roman dames

At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.

Come, let us go and pray to all the gods

For our belovèd mother in her pains.

Why do the Emperor’s trumpets flourish thus?

Soft, who comes here?

Villain, what hast thou done?

And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone her.

Woe to her chance, and damned her loathèd choice!

Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend!

I’ll broach the tadpole on my rapier’s point.

Nurse, give it me. My sword shall soon dispatch it.

Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?

By this our mother is forever shamed.

Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,

And we will all subscribe to thy advice.

Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.

How many women saw this child of his?

What mean’st thou, Aaron? Wherefore didst thou this?

For this care of Tamora,

Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.

Show me a murderer; I’ll deal with him.

Madam, depart at pleasure. Leave us here.

