


Romans, friends, followers, favorers of my right,

If ever Bassianus, Caesar’s son,

Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,

Keep, then, this passage to the Capitol,

And suffer not dishonor to approach

The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,

To justice, continence, and nobility;

But let desert in pure election shine,

And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.

Marcus Andronicus, so I do affy

In thy uprightness and integrity,

And so I love and honor thee and thine,

Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,

And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,

Gracious Lavinia, Rome’s rich ornament,

That I will here dismiss my loving friends,

And to my fortunes and the people’s favor

Commit my cause in balance to be weighed.

Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor.

Andronicus, I do not flatter thee,

But honor thee, and will do till I die.

My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,

I will most thankful be, and thanks, to men

Of noble minds, is honorable meed.

Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine.

Ay, noble Titus, and resolved withal

To do myself this reason and this right.

By him that justly may

Bear his betrothed from all the world away.

And you of yours, my lord. I say no more,

Nor wish no less, and so I take my leave.

“Rape” call you it, my lord, to seize my own,

My true betrothèd love and now my wife?

But let the laws of Rome determine all.

Meanwhile am I possessed of that is mine.

My lord, what I have done, as best I may,

Answer I must, and shall do with my life.

Only thus much I give your Grace to know:

By all the duties that I owe to Rome,

This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here,

Is in opinion and in honor wronged,

That in the rescue of Lavinia

With his own hand did slay his youngest son,

In zeal to you, and highly moved to wrath

To be controlled in that he frankly gave.

Receive him then to favor, Saturnine,

That hath expressed himself in all his deeds

A father and a friend to thee and Rome.

Lavinia, how say you?

Who have we here? Rome’s royal empress,

Unfurnished of her well-beseeming troop?

Or is it Dian, habited like her,

Who hath abandonèd her holy groves

To see the general hunting in this forest?

Believe me, queen, your swarthy Cimmerian

Doth make your honor of his body’s hue,

Spotted, detested, and abominable.

Why are you sequestered from all your train,

Dismounted from your snow-white goodly steed,

And wandered hither to an obscure plot,

Accompanied but with a barbarous Moor,

If foul desire had not conducted you?

The King my brother shall have notice of this.

