


Stay, Roman brethren!—Gracious conqueror,

Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,

A mother’s tears in passion for her son.

And if thy sons were ever dear to thee,

O think my son to be as dear to me.

Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome

To beautify thy triumphs and return

Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke,

But must my sons be slaughtered in the streets

For valiant doings in their country’s cause?

O, if to fight for king and commonweal

Were piety in thine, it is in these!

Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood.

Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?

Draw near them then in being merciful.

Sweet mercy is nobility’s true badge.

Thrice-noble Titus, spare my first-born son.

O cruel, irreligious piety!

And here in sight of heaven to Rome I swear,

If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,

She will a handmaid be to his desires,

A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.

My worthy lord, if ever Tamora

Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine,

Then hear me speak indifferently for all,

And at my suit, sweet, pardon what is past.

Not so, my lord; the gods of Rome forfend

I should be author to dishonor you.

But on mine honor dare I undertake

For good Lord Titus’ innocence in all,

Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs.

Then at my suit look graciously on him.

Lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,

Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.

My lord, be ruled by me; be won at last.

Dissemble all your griefs and discontents.

You are but newly planted in your throne.

Lest, then, the people, and patricians too,

Upon a just survey take Titus’ part

And so supplant you for ingratitude,

Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin.

Yield at entreats, and then let me alone.

I’ll find a day to massacre them all

And raze their faction and their family,

The cruel father and his traitorous sons,

To whom I sued for my dear son’s life,

And make them know what ’tis to let a queen

Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.

Come, come, sweet emperor.—Come, Andronicus.—

Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart

That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.

Titus, I am incorporate in Rome,

A Roman now adopted happily,

And must advise the Emperor for his good.

This day all quarrels die, Andronicus.—

And let it be mine honor, good my lord,

That I have reconciled your friends and you.—

For you, Prince Bassianus, I have passed

My word and promise to the Emperor

That you will be more mild and tractable.—

And fear not, lords—and you, Lavinia.

By my advice, all humbled on your knees,

You shall ask pardon of his Majesty.

Nay, nay, sweet emperor, we must all be friends.

The tribune and his nephews kneel for grace.

I will not be denied. Sweetheart, look back.

My lovely Aaron, wherefore look’st thou sad,

When everything doth make a gleeful boast?

The birds chant melody on every bush,

The snakes lies rollèd in the cheerful sun,

The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind

And make a checkered shadow on the ground.

Under their sweet shade, Aaron, let us sit,

And whilst the babbling echo mocks the hounds,

Replying shrilly to the well-tuned horns,

As if a double hunt were heard at once,

Let us sit down and mark their yellowing noise.

And after conflict such as was supposed

The wand’ring prince and Dido once enjoyed

When with a happy storm they were surprised,

And curtained with a counsel-keeping cave,

We may, each wreathèd in the other’s arms,

Our pastimes done, possess a golden slumber,

Whiles hounds and horns and sweet melodious birds

Be unto us as is a nurse’s song

Of lullaby to bring her babe asleep.

Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me than life!

Saucy controller of my private steps,

Had I the power that some say Dian had,

Thy temples should be planted presently

With horns, as was Acteon’s, and the hounds

Should drive upon thy new-transformèd limbs,

Unmannerly intruder as thou art.

Why, I have patience to endure all this.

Have I not reason, think you, to look pale?

These two have ticed me hither to this place,

A barren, detested vale you see it is;

The trees, though summer, yet forlorn and lean,

Overcome with moss and baleful mistletoe.

Here never shines the sun, here nothing breeds,

Unless the nightly owl or fatal raven.

And when they showed me this abhorrèd pit,

They told me, here at dead time of the night

A thousand fiends, a thousand hissing snakes,

Ten thousand swelling toads, as many urchins,

Would make such fearful and confusèd cries

As any mortal body hearing it

Should straight fall mad, or else die suddenly.

No sooner had they told this hellish tale

But straight they told me they would bind me here

Unto the body of a dismal yew

And leave me to this miserable death.

And then they called me foul adulteress,

Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest terms

That ever ear did hear to such effect.

And had you not by wondrous fortune come,

This vengeance on me had they executed.

Revenge it as you love your mother’s life,

Or be you not henceforth called my children.

Give me the poniard! You shall know, my boys,

Your mother’s hand shall right your mother’s wrong.

But when you have the honey you desire,

Let not this wasp outlive, us both to sting.

I will not hear her speak. Away with her.

I know not what it means.—Away with her.

Hadst thou in person ne’er offended me,

Even for his sake am I pitiless.—

Remember, boys, I poured forth tears in vain

To save your brother from the sacrifice,

But fierce Andronicus would not relent.

Therefore away with her, and use her as you will;

The worse to her, the better loved of me.

What begg’st thou, then? Fond woman, let me go!

So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee.

No, let them satisfy their lust on thee.

Farewell, my sons. See that you make her sure.

Ne’er let my heart know merry cheer indeed

Till all the Andronici be made away.

Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor,

And let my spleenful sons this trull deflower.

Where is my lord the King?

Where is thy brother Bassianus?

Then all too late I bring this fatal writ,

The complot of this timeless tragedy,

And wonder greatly that man’s face can fold

In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny.

What, are they in this pit? O wondrous thing!

How easily murder is discoverèd.

Andronicus himself did take it up.

Andronicus, I will entreat the King.

Fear not thy sons; they shall do well enough.

My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,

Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,

Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus’ age,

Th’ effects of sorrow for his valiant sons,

Whose loss hath pierced him deep and scarred his heart,

And rather comfort his distressèd plight

Than prosecute the meanest or the best

For these contempts. Why, thus it shall become

High-witted Tamora to gloze with all.

But, Titus, I have touched thee to the quick.

Thy lifeblood out, if Aaron now be wise,

Then is all safe, the anchor in the port.

How now, good fellow, wouldst thou speak with us?

Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor.

Come, sirrah, you must be hanged.

Why should you fear? Is not your city strong?

King, be thy thoughts imperious like thy name.

Is the sun dimmed that gnats do fly in it?

The eagle suffers little birds to sing

And is not careful what they mean thereby,

Knowing that with the shadow of his wings

He can at pleasure stint their melody.

Even so mayst thou the giddy men of Rome.

Then cheer thy spirit, for know, thou emperor,

I will enchant the old Andronicus

With words more sweet and yet more dangerous

Than baits to fish or honey-stalks to sheep,

Whenas the one is wounded with the bait,

The other rotted with delicious feed.

If Tamora entreat him, then he will,

For I can smooth and fill his agèd ears

With golden promises, that were his heart

Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf,

Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.

Go thou before to be our ambassador.

Say that the Emperor requests a parley

Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting

Even at his father’s house, the old Andronicus.

Now will I to that old Andronicus

And temper him with all the art I have

To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.

And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again,

And bury all thy fear in my devices.

Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment

I will encounter with Andronicus

And say I am Revenge, sent from below

To join with him and right his heinous wrongs.

Knock at his study, where they say he keeps

To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge.

Tell him Revenge is come to join with him

And work confusion on his enemies.

Titus, I am come to talk with thee.

If thou didst know me, thou wouldst talk with me.

Know, thou sad man, I am not Tamora.

She is thy enemy, and I thy friend.

I am Revenge, sent from th’ infernal kingdom

To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind

By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes.

Come down and welcome me to this world’s light.

Confer with me of murder and of death.

There’s not a hollow cave or lurking-place,

No vast obscurity or misty vale

Where bloody murder or detested rape

Can couch for fear but I will find them out,

And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,

Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake.

I am. Therefore come down and welcome me.

These are my ministers and come with me.

Rape and Murder; therefore callèd so

’Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.

This closing with him fits his lunacy.

Whate’er I forge to feed his brainsick humors,

Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,

For now he firmly takes me for Revenge;

And, being credulous in this mad thought,

I’ll make him send for Lucius his son;

And whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,

I’ll find some cunning practice out of hand

To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,

Or, at the least, make them his enemies.

See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.

What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus?

Show me a thousand that hath done thee wrong,

And I will be revengèd on them all.

Well hast thou lessoned us; this shall we do.

But would it please thee, good Andronicus,

To send for Lucius, thy thrice-valiant son,

Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths,

And bid him come and banquet at thy house?

When he is here, even at thy solemn feast,

I will bring in the Empress and her sons,

The Emperor himself, and all thy foes,

And at thy mercy shall they stoop and kneel,

And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.

What says Andronicus to this device?

Now will I hence about thy business

And take my ministers along with me.

What say you, boys? Will you abide with him

Whiles I go tell my lord the Emperor

How I have governed our determined jest?

Yield to his humor, smooth and speak him fair,

And tarry with him till I turn again.

Farewell, Andronicus. Revenge now goes

To lay a complot to betray thy foes.

We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.

Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?

