


All hail, great master! Grave sir, hail! I come

To answer thy best pleasure. Be ’t to fly,

To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride

On the curled clouds, to thy strong bidding task

Ariel and all his quality.

To every article.

I boarded the King’s ship; now on the beak,

Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,

I flamed amazement. Sometimes I’d divide

And burn in many places. On the topmast,

The yards, and bowsprit would I flame distinctly,

Then meet and join. Jove’s lightning, the precursors

O’ th’ dreadful thunderclaps, more momentary

And sight-outrunning were not. The fire and cracks

Of sulfurous roaring the most mighty Neptune

Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,

Yea, his dread trident shake.

Not a soul

But felt a fever of the mad, and played

Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners

Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,

Then all afire with me. The King’s son, Ferdinand,

With hair up-staring—then like reeds, not hair—

Was the first man that leaped; cried “Hell is empty,

And all the devils are here.”

Close by, my master.

Not a hair perished.

On their sustaining garments not a blemish,

But fresher than before; and, as thou bad’st me,

In troops I have dispersed them ’bout the isle.

The King’s son have I landed by himself,

Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs

In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,

His arms in this sad knot.

Safely in harbor

Is the King’s ship. In the deep nook, where once

Thou called’st me up at midnight to fetch dew

From the still-vexed Bermoothes, there she’s hid;

The mariners all under hatches stowed,

Who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor,

I have left asleep. And for the rest o’ th’ fleet,

Which I dispersed, they all have met again

And are upon the Mediterranean float,

Bound sadly home for Naples,

Supposing that they saw the King’s ship wracked

And his great person perish.

Past the mid season.

Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,

Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,

Which is not yet performed me.

My liberty.

I prithee,

Remember I have done thee worthy service,

Told thee no lies, made no mistakings, served

Without or grudge or grumblings. Thou did promise

To bate me a full year.

No.

I do not, sir.

No, sir.

Sir, in Argier.

Ay, sir.

Yes, Caliban, her son.

I thank thee, master.

Pardon, master.

I will be correspondent to command

And do my spriting gently.

That’s my noble master.

What shall I do? Say, what? What shall I do?

My lord, it shall be done.

Come unto these yellow sands,

And then take hands.

Curtsied when you have, and kissed

The wild waves whist.

Foot it featly here and there,

And sweet sprites bear

The burden. Hark, hark!

Bow-wow.

The watchdogs bark.

Bow-wow.

Hark, hark! I hear

The strain of strutting chanticleer

Cry cock-a-diddle-dow.

Full fathom five thy father lies.

Of his bones are coral made.

Those are pearls that were his eyes.

Nothing of him that doth fade

But doth suffer a sea change

Into something rich and strange.

Sea nymphs hourly ring his knell.

Ding dong.

Hark, now I hear them: ding dong bell.

To th’ syllable.

My master through his art foresees the danger

That you, his friend, are in, and sends me forth—

For else his project dies—to keep them living.

While you here do snoring lie,

Open-eyed conspiracy

His time doth take.

If of life you keep a care,

Shake off slumber and beware.

Awake, awake!

Prospero my lord shall know what I have done.

So, king, go safely on to seek thy son.

Thou liest.

Thou liest. Thou canst not.

Thou liest.

This will I tell my master.

You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,

That hath to instrument this lower world

And what is in ’t, the never-surfeited sea

Hath caused to belch up you, and on this island,

Where man doth not inhabit, you ’mongst men

Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad;

And even with such-like valor, men hang and drown

Their proper selves.  You fools, I and my fellows

Are ministers of Fate. The elements

Of whom your swords are tempered may as well

Wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs

Kill the still-closing waters as diminish

One dowl that’s in my plume. My fellow ministers

Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,

Your swords are now too massy for your strengths

And will not be uplifted. But remember—

For that’s my business to you—that you three

From Milan did supplant good Prospero,

Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,

Him and his innocent child, for which foul deed,

The powers—delaying, not forgetting—have

Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures

Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso,

They have bereft; and do pronounce by me

Ling’ring perdition, worse than any death

Can be at once, shall step by step attend

You and your ways, whose wraths to guard you from—

Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls

Upon your heads—is nothing but heart’s sorrow

And a clear life ensuing.

What would my potent master? Here I am.

Presently?

Before you can say “Come” and “Go,”

And breathe twice, and cry “So, so,”

Each one, tripping on his toe,

Will be here with mop and mow.

Do you love me, master? No?

Well; I conceive.

Thy thoughts I cleave to. What’s thy pleasure?

Ay, my commander. When I presented Ceres,

I thought to have told thee of it, but I feared

Lest I might anger thee.

I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking,

So full of valor that they smote the air

For breathing in their faces, beat the ground

For kissing of their feet; yet always bending

Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor,

At which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their ears,

Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses

As they smelt music. So I charmed their ears

That, calf-like, they my lowing followed through

Toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and thorns,

Which entered their frail shins. At last I left them

I’ th’ filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell,

There dancing up to th’ chins, that the foul lake

O’erstunk their feet.

I go, I go.

Silver! There it goes, Silver!

Hark, they roar.

On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,

You said our work should cease.

Confined together

In the same fashion as you gave in charge,

Just as you left them; all prisoners, sir,

In the line grove which weather-fends your cell.

They cannot budge till your release. The King,

His brother, and yours abide all three distracted,

And the remainder mourning over them,

Brimful of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly

Him that you termed, sir, the good old Lord Gonzalo.

His tears runs down his beard like winter’s drops

From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works ’em

That if you now beheld them, your affections

Would become tender.

Mine would, sir, were I human.

I’ll fetch them, sir.

Where the bee sucks, there suck I.

In a cowslip’s bell I lie.

There I couch when owls do cry.

On the bat’s back I do fly

After summer merrily.

Merrily, merrily shall I live now

Under the blossom that hangs on the bow.

I drink the air before me, and return

Or ere your pulse twice beat.

Sir, all this service

Have I done since I went.

Was ’t well done?

