


Here, master. What cheer?

Heigh, my hearts! Cheerly, cheerly, my

hearts! Yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to th’

Master’s whistle.—Blow till thou burst thy wind, if

room enough!

I pray now, keep below.

Do you not hear him? You mar our labor.

Keep your cabins. You do assist the storm.

When the sea is. Hence! What cares these

roarers for the name of king? To cabin! Silence!

Trouble us not.

None that I more love than myself. You are

a councillor; if you can command these elements

to silence, and work the peace of the present, we

will not hand a rope more. Use your authority. If

you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and

make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance

of the hour, if it so hap.—Cheerly, good

hearts!—Out of our way, I say!

Down with the topmast! Yare! Lower, lower!

Bring her to try wi’ th’ main course.

A plague upon this howling! They are

louder than the weather or our office.

Yet again? What do you here? Shall we give o’er and

drown? Have you a mind to sink?

Work you, then.

Lay her ahold, ahold! Set her two courses.

Off to sea again! Lay her off!

What, must our mouths be cold?

The best news is that we have safely found

Our king and company. The next: our ship,

Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split,

Is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when

We first put out to sea.

If I did think, sir, I were well awake,

I’d strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep

And—how, we know not—all clapped under hatches,

Where, but even now, with strange and several noises

Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,

And more diversity of sounds, all horrible,

We were awaked, straightway at liberty,

Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld

Our royal, good, and gallant ship, our master

Cap’ring to eye her. On a trice, so please you,

Even in a dream were we divided from them

And were brought moping hither.

