


Where should this music be? I’ th’ air, or th’ earth?

It sounds no more; and sure it waits upon

Some god o’ th’ island. Sitting on a bank,

Weeping again the King my father’s wrack,

This music crept by me upon the waters,

Allaying both their fury and my passion

With its sweet air. Thence I have followed it,

Or it hath drawn me rather. But ’tis gone.

No, it begins again.

The ditty does remember my drowned father.

This is no mortal business, nor no sound

That the Earth owes. I hear it now above me.

Most sure, the goddess

On whom these airs attend!—Vouchsafe my prayer

May know if you remain upon this island,

And that you will some good instruction give

How I may bear me here. My prime request,

Which I do last pronounce, is—O you wonder!—

If you be maid or no.

My language! Heavens!

I am the best of them that speak this speech,

Were I but where ’tis spoken.

A single thing, as I am now, that wonders

To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me,

And that he does I weep. Myself am Naples,

Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld

The King my father wracked.

Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan

And his brave son being twain.

O, if a virgin,

And your affection not gone forth, I’ll make you

The Queen of Naples.

No, as I am a man!

No,

I will resist such entertainment till

Mine enemy has more power.

So they are.

My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.

My father’s loss, the weakness which I feel,

The wrack of all my friends, nor this man’s threats

To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,

Might I but through my prison once a day

Behold this maid. All corners else o’ th’ Earth

Let liberty make use of. Space enough

Have I in such a prison.

There be some sports are painful, and their labor

Delight in them sets off; some kinds of baseness

Are nobly undergone; and most poor matters

Point to rich ends. This my mean task

Would be as heavy to me as odious, but

The mistress which I serve quickens what’s dead

And makes my labors pleasures. O, she is

Ten times more gentle than her father’s crabbed,

And he’s composed of harshness. I must remove

Some thousands of these logs and pile them up,

Upon a sore injunction. My sweet mistress

Weeps when she sees me work, and says such baseness

Had never like executor. I forget;

But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors,

Most busiest when I do it.

O most dear mistress,

The sun will set before I shall discharge

What I must strive to do.

No, precious creature,

I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,

Than you should such dishonor undergo

While I sit lazy by.

No, noble mistress, ’tis fresh morning with me

When you are by at night. I do beseech you,

Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers,

What is your name?

Admired Miranda!

Indeed the top of admiration, worth

What’s dearest to the world! Full many a lady

I have eyed with best regard, and many a time

Th’ harmony of their tongues hath into bondage

Brought my too diligent ear. For several virtues

Have I liked several women, never any

With so full soul but some defect in her

Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed,

And put it to the foil. But you, O you,

So perfect and so peerless, are created

Of every creature’s best.

I am in my condition

A prince, Miranda; I do think a king—

I would, not so!—and would no more endure

This wooden slavery than to suffer

The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak:

The very instant that I saw you did

My heart fly to your service, there resides

To make me slave to it, and for your sake

Am I this patient log-man.

O heaven, O Earth, bear witness to this sound,

And crown what I profess with kind event

If I speak true; if hollowly, invert

What best is boded me to mischief. I,

Beyond all limit of what else i’ th’ world,

Do love, prize, honor you.

Wherefore weep you?

My mistress, dearest, and I thus humble ever.

Ay, with a heart as willing

As bondage e’er of freedom. Here’s my hand.

A thousand thousand.

I do believe it

Against an oracle.

As I hope

For quiet days, fair issue, and long life,

With such love as ’tis now, the murkiest den,

The most opportune place, the strong’st suggestion

Our worser genius can shall never melt

Mine honor into lust to take away

The edge of that day’s celebration

When I shall think or Phoebus’ steeds are foundered

Or night kept chained below.

I warrant you, sir,

The white cold virgin snow upon my heart

Abates the ardor of my liver.

This is a most majestic vision, and

Harmonious charmingly. May I be bold

To think these spirits?

Let me live here ever.

So rare a wondered father and a wise

Makes this place paradise.

This is strange. Your father’s in some passion

That works him strongly.

We wish your peace.

No, my dearest love,

I would not for the world.

Though the seas threaten, they are merciful.

I have cursed them without cause.

Sir, she is mortal,

But by immortal providence she’s mine.

I chose her when I could not ask my father

For his advice, nor thought I had one. She

Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,

Of whom so often I have heard renown,

But never saw before, of whom I have

Received a second life; and second father

This lady makes him to me.

