


Will you stay no longer? Nor will you not that

I go with you?

Let me yet know of you whither you are

bound.

Alas the day!

Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.

If you will not murder me for my love, let me

be your servant.

The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!

I have many enemies in Orsino’s court,

Else would I very shortly see thee there.

But come what may, I do adore thee so

That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.

I could not stay behind you. My desire,

More sharp than filèd steel, did spur me forth;

And not all love to see you, though so much

As might have drawn one to a longer voyage,

But jealousy what might befall your travel,

Being skill-less in these parts, which to a stranger,

Unguided and unfriended, often prove

Rough and unhospitable. My willing love,

The rather by these arguments of fear,

Set forth in your pursuit.

Tomorrow, sir. Best first go see your lodging.

Would you’d pardon me.

I do not without danger walk these streets.

Once in a sea fight ’gainst the Count his galleys

I did some service, of such note indeed

That were I ta’en here it would scarce be answered.

Th’ offense is not of such a bloody nature,

Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel

Might well have given us bloody argument.

It might have since been answered in repaying

What we took from them, which, for traffic’s sake,

Most of our city did. Only myself stood out,

For which, if I be lapsèd in this place,

I shall pay dear.

It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, here’s my purse.

In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,

Is best to lodge. I will bespeak our diet

Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge

With viewing of the town. There shall you have me.

Haply your eye shall light upon some toy

You have desire to purchase, and your store,

I think, is not for idle markets, sir.

To th’ Elephant.

Put up your sword. If this young gentleman

Have done offense, I take the fault on me.

If you offend him, I for him defy you.

One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more

Than you have heard him brag to you he will.

You do mistake me, sir.

I must obey. This comes with seeking you.

But there’s no remedy. I shall answer it.

What will you do, now my necessity

Makes me to ask you for my purse? It grieves me

Much more for what I cannot do for you

Than what befalls myself. You stand amazed,

But be of comfort.

I must entreat of you some of that money.

Will you deny me now?

Is ’t possible that my deserts to you

Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery,

Lest that it make me so unsound a man

As to upbraid you with those kindnesses

That I have done for you.

O heavens themselves!

Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here

I snatched one half out of the jaws of death,

Relieved him with such sanctity of love,

And to his image, which methought did promise

Most venerable worth, did I devotion.

But O, how vile an idol proves this god!

Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.

In nature there’s no blemish but the mind;

None can be called deformed but the unkind.

Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil

Are empty trunks o’erflourished by the devil.

Lead me on.

Orsino, noble sir,

Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me.

Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,

Though, I confess, on base and ground enough,

Orsino’s enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither.

That most ingrateful boy there by your side

From the rude sea’s enraged and foamy mouth

Did I redeem; a wrack past hope he was.

His life I gave him and did thereto add

My love, without retention or restraint,

All his in dedication. For his sake

Did I expose myself, pure for his love,

Into the danger of this adverse town;

Drew to defend him when he was beset;

Where, being apprehended, his false cunning

(Not meaning to partake with me in danger)

Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance

And grew a twenty years’ removèd thing

While one would wink; denied me mine own purse,

Which I had recommended to his use

Not half an hour before.

Today, my lord; and for three months before,

No int’rim, not a minute’s vacancy,

Both day and night did we keep company.

Sebastian are you?

How have you made division of yourself?

An apple cleft in two is not more twin

Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?

