


Sir, I demand no more than your own offer,

and I will estate your daughter in what I have

promised.

I have sir. Here she comes.

I never saw ’em.

Alas, sir, where’s your daughter?

O, sir, when did you see her?

Was she well? Was she in health?

Sir, when did she sleep?

Nothing but my pity;

But you must know it, and as good by me

As by another that less loves her.

No, sir, not well.

’Tis too true; she is mad.

Believe you’ll find it so.

’Tis likely.

I’ll tell you quickly. As I late was angling

In the great lake that lies behind the palace,

From the far shore—thick set with reeds and sedges—

As patiently I was attending sport,

I heard a voice, a shrill one; and, attentive,

I gave my ear, when I might well perceive

’Twas one that sung, and by the smallness of it

A boy or woman. I then left my angle

To his own skill, came near, but yet perceived not

Who made the sound, the rushes and the reeds

Had so encompassed it. I laid me down

And listened to the words she sung, for then,

Through a small glade cut by the fishermen,

I saw it was your daughter.

She sung much, but no sense; only I heard her

Repeat this often: “Palamon is gone,

Is gone to th’ wood to gather mulberries;

I’ll find him out tomorrow.”

“His shackles will betray him; he’ll be taken,

And what shall I do then? I’ll bring a bevy,

A hundred black-eyed maids that love as I do,

With chaplets on their heads of daffadillies,

With cherry lips and cheeks of damask roses,

And all we’ll dance an antic ’fore the Duke,

And beg his pardon.” Then she talked of you, sir—

That you must lose your head tomorrow morning,

And she must gather flowers to bury you,

And see the house made handsome. Then she sung

Nothing but “Willow, willow, willow,” and between

Ever was “Palamon, fair Palamon,”

And “Palamon was a tall young man.” The place

Was knee-deep where she sat; her careless tresses,

A wreath of bulrush rounded; about her stuck

Thousand freshwater flowers of several colors,

That methought she appeared like the fair nymph

That feeds the lake with waters, or as Iris

Newly dropped down from heaven. Rings she made

Of rushes that grew by, and to ’em spoke

The prettiest posies: “Thus our true love’s tied,”

“This you may lose, not me,” and many a one;

And then she wept, and sung again, and sighed,

And with the same breath smiled and kissed her hand.

I made in to her.

She saw me, and straight sought the flood. I saved her

And set her safe to land, when presently

She slipped away, and to the city made

With such a cry and swiftness that, believe me,

She left me far behind her. Three or four

I saw from far off cross her—one of ’em

I knew to be your brother—where she stayed

And fell, scarce to be got away. I left them with her

And hither came to tell you.    Here they are.

Owgh, owgh, owgh!—’Tis up!

The wind’s fair!—Top the bowline!—Out with the

main sail! Where’s your whistle, master?

I did think so, too, and would account I had a

great penn’orth on ’t to give half my state that both

she and I, at this present, stood unfeignedly on the

same terms.

O, very much. The maids that kept her company

Have half-persuaded her that I am Palamon;

Within this half-hour she came smiling to me,

And asked me what I would eat, and when I would kiss her.

I told her “Presently,” and kissed her twice.

Then she told me

She would watch with me tonight, for well she knew

What hour my fit would take me.

She would have me sing.

No.

Alas,

I have no voice, sir, to confirm her that way.

Why, do you think she is not honest, sir?

She’s eighteen.

Yes, very well, sir.

I am of your mind, doctor.

Pretty soul,

How do you? That’s a fine maid; there’s a curtsy!

What shall we do there, wench?

I am content,

If we shall keep our wedding there.

Do not you know me?

That’s all one; I will have you.

Yes, by this fair hand, will I.

E’en when you will.

Why do you rub my kiss off?

I will.

Come, sweet, we’ll go to dinner

And then we’ll play at cards.

A hundred times.

Ay, and twenty.

Yes, marry, will we.

I will not, sweet.

