


For pity’s sake and true gentility’s,

Hear and respect me.

We are three queens whose sovereigns fell before

The wrath of cruel Creon; who endured

The beaks of ravens, talons of the kites,

And pecks of crows in the foul fields of Thebes.

He will not suffer us to burn their bones,

To urn their ashes, nor to take th’ offense

Of mortal loathsomeness from the blest eye

Of holy Phoebus, but infects the winds

With stench of our slain lords. O, pity, duke!

Thou purger of the Earth, draw thy feared sword

That does good turns to th’ world; give us the bones

Of our dead kings, that we may chapel them;

And of thy boundless goodness take some note

That for our crownèd heads we have no roof

Save this, which is the lion’s and the bear’s,

And vault to everything.

O, I hope some god,

Some god hath put his mercy in your manhood,

Whereto he’ll infuse power, and press you forth

Our undertaker.

O, this celebration

Will longer last and be more costly than

Your suppliants’ war. Remember that your fame

Knolls in the ear o’ th’ world; what you do quickly

Is not done rashly; your first thought is more

Than others’ labored meditance, your premeditating

More than their actions. But, O Jove, your actions,

Soon as they move, as ospreys do the fish,

Subdue before they touch. Think, dear duke, think

What beds our slain kings have!

But our lords

Lie blist’ring ’fore the visitating sun,

And were good kings when living.

And that work presents itself to th’ doing.

Now ’twill take form; the heats are gone tomorrow.

Then, bootless toil must recompense itself

With its own sweat. Now he’s secure,

Not dreams we stand before your puissance,

Rinsing our holy begging in our eyes

To make petition clear.

 Dowagers, take hands.

Let us be widows to our woes. Delay

Commends us to a famishing hope.

Farewell.

The more proclaiming

Our suit shall be neglected when her arms,

Able to lock Jove from a synod, shall

By warranting moonlight corselet thee. O, when

Her twinning cherries shall their sweetness fall

Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think

Of rotten kings or blubbered queens? What care

For what thou feel’st not, what thou feel’st being able

To make Mars spurn his drum? O, if thou couch

But one night with her, every hour in ’t will

Take hostage of thee for a hundred, and

Thou shalt remember nothing more than what

That banquet bids thee to.

O, help now!

Our cause cries for your knee.

Thus dost thou still make good the tongue o’ th’ world.

To thee no star be dark!

Urns and odors bring away;

Vapors, sighs, darken the day;

Our dole more deadly looks than dying;

Balms and gums and heavy cheers,

Sacred vials filled with tears,

And clamors through the wild air flying.

Come, all sad and solemn shows

That are quick-eyed Pleasure’s foes;

We convent naught else but woes.

We convent naught else but woes.

Yours this way. Heavens lend

A thousand differing ways to one sure end.

