


These strewings are for their chamber. ’Tis

pity they are in prison, and ’twere pity they should

be out. I do think they have patience to make any

adversity ashamed. The prison itself is proud of

’em, and they have all the world in their chamber.

By my troth, I think fame but stammers

’em. They stand a grise above the reach of report.

Nay, most likely, for they are noble suff’rers.

I marvel how they would have looked had they

been victors, that with such a constant nobility enforce

a freedom out of bondage, making misery

their mirth and affliction a toy to jest at.

It seems to me they have no more sense

of their captivity than I of ruling Athens. They eat

well, look merrily, discourse of many things, but

nothing of their own restraint and disasters. Yet

sometimes a divided sigh, martyred as ’twere i’ th’

deliverance, will break from one of them—when

the other presently gives it so sweet a rebuke that

I could wish myself a sigh to be so chid, or at least

a sigher to be comforted.

No, sir, no, that’s Palamon. Arcite is the

lower of the twain; you may perceive a part of

him.

It is a holiday to look on them. Lord, the

diff’rence of men!

Why should I love this gentleman? ’Tis odds

He never will affect me. I am base,

My father the mean keeper of his prison,

And he a prince. To marry him is hopeless;

To be his whore is witless. Out upon ’t!

What pushes are we wenches driven to

When fifteen once has found us! First, I saw him;

I, seeing, thought he was a goodly man;

He has as much to please a woman in him,

If he please to bestow it so, as ever

These eyes yet looked on. Next, I pitied him,

And so would any young wench, o’ my conscience,

That ever dreamed, or vowed her maidenhead

To a young handsome man. Then I loved him,

Extremely loved him, infinitely loved him!

And yet he had a cousin, fair as he too.

But in my heart was Palamon, and there,

Lord, what a coil he keeps! To hear him

Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is!

And yet his songs are sad ones. Fairer spoken

Was never gentleman. When I come in

To bring him water in a morning, first

He bows his noble body, then salutes me thus:

“Fair, gentle maid, good morrow. May thy goodness

Get thee a happy husband.” Once he kissed me;

I loved my lips the better ten days after.

Would he would do so ev’ry day! He grieves much—

And me as much to see his misery.

What should I do to make him know I love him?

For I would fain enjoy him. Say I ventured

To set him free? What says the law then?

Thus much for law or kindred! I will do it,

And this night, or tomorrow, he shall love me.

Let all the dukes and all the devils roar!

He is at liberty. I have ventured for him,

And out I have brought him; to a little wood

A mile hence I have sent him, where a cedar

Higher than all the rest spreads like a plane

Fast by a brook, and there he shall keep close

Till I provide him files and food, for yet

His iron bracelets are not off. O Love,

What a stout-hearted child thou art! My father

Durst better have endured cold iron than done it.

I love him beyond love and beyond reason

Or wit or safety. I have made him know it;

I care not, I am desperate. If the law

Find me and then condemn me for ’t, some wenches,

Some honest-hearted maids, will sing my dirge

And tell to memory my death was noble,

Dying almost a martyr. That way he takes

I purpose is my way too. Sure he cannot

Be so unmanly as to leave me here.

If he do, maids will not so easily

Trust men again. And yet he has not thanked me

For what I have done; no, not so much as kissed me,

And that, methinks, is not so well; nor scarcely

Could I persuade him to become a free man,

He made such scruples of the wrong he did

To me and to my father. Yet I hope,

When he considers more, this love of mine

Will take more root within him. Let him do

What he will with me, so he use me kindly;

For use me so he shall, or I’ll proclaim him,

And to his face, no man. I’ll presently

Provide him necessaries and pack my clothes up,

And where there is a path of ground I’ll venture,

So he be with me. By him like a shadow

I’ll ever dwell. Within this hour the hubbub

Will be all o’er the prison. I am then

Kissing the man they look for. Farewell, father!

Get many more such prisoners and such daughters,

And shortly you may keep yourself. Now to him.

He has mistook the brake I meant, is gone

After his fancy. ’Tis now well-nigh morning.

No matter; would it were perpetual night,

And darkness lord o’ th’ world. Hark, ’tis a wolf!

In me hath grief slain fear, and but for one thing,

I care for nothing, and that’s Palamon.

I reck not if the wolves would jaw me, so

He had this file. What if I hallowed for him?

I cannot hallow. If I whooped, what then?

If he not answered, I should call a wolf,

And do him but that service. I have heard

Strange howls this livelong night; why may ’t not be

They have made prey of him? He has no weapons;

He cannot run; the jingling of his gyves

Might call fell things to listen, who have in them

A sense to know a man unarmed and can

Smell where resistance is. I’ll set it down

He’s torn to pieces; they howled many together,

And then they fed on him; so much for that.

Be bold to ring the bell. How stand I then?

All’s chared when he is gone. No, no, I lie.

My father’s to be hanged for his escape;

Myself to beg, if I prized life so much

As to deny my act, but that I would not,

Should I try death by dozens. I am moped;

Food took I none these two days;

Sipped some water. I have not closed mine eyes

Save when my lids scoured off their brine. Alas,

Dissolve, my life! Let not my sense unsettle,

Lest I should drown, or stab, or hang myself.

O state of nature, fail together in me,

Since thy best props are warped! So, which way now?

The best way is the next way to a grave;

Each errant step beside is torment. Lo,

The moon is down, the crickets chirp, the screech owl

Calls in the dawn. All offices are done

Save what I fail in. But the point is this—

An end, and that is all.

I am very cold, and all the stars are out too,

The little stars and all, that look like aglets.

The sun has seen my folly.—Palamon!

Alas, no; he’s in heaven. Where am I now?

Yonder’s the sea, and there’s a ship. How ’t tumbles!

And there’s a rock lies watching under water.

Now, now, it beats upon it; now, now, now,

There’s a leak sprung, a sound one! How they cry!

Open her before the wind; you’ll lose all else.

Up with a course or two, and tack about, boys!

Good night, good night; you’re gone. I am very hungry.

Would I could find a fine frog; he would tell me

News from all parts o’ th’ world; then would I make

A carrack of a cockleshell, and sail

By east and northeast to the king of pygmies,

For he tells fortunes rarely. Now my father,

Twenty to one, is trussed up in a trice

Tomorrow morning. I’ll say never a word.

For I’ll cut my green coat a foot above my knee,

And I’ll clip my yellow locks an inch below mine eye.

Hey nonny, nonny, nonny.

He’s buy me a white cut, forth for to ride,

And I’ll go seek him through the world that is so wide.

Hey nonny, nonny, nonny.

O, for a prick now, like a nightingale,

To put my breast against. I shall sleep like a top else.

The George Alow came from the south,

From the coast of Barbary-a,

And there he met with brave gallants of war,

By one, by two, by three-a.

“Well hailed, well hailed, you jolly gallants,

And whither now are you bound-a?

O, let me have your company

Till I come to the sound-a.”

There was three fools, fell out about an owlet—

The one he said it was an owl,

The other he said nay,

The third he said it was a hawk,

And her bells were cut away.

I would be sorry else. Give me your hand.

I can tell your fortune.

You are a fool. Tell ten.—I have posed him.

Buzz!—Friend, you must eat no white bread; if

you do, your teeth will bleed extremely. Shall we

dance, ho? I know you, you’re a tinker. Sirrah tinker,

stop no more holes but what you should.

Or a conjurer. Raise me a devil now, and let

him play Chi passa o’ th’ bells and bones.

I’ll lead.

May you never more enjoy the light, etc.

Is not this a fine song?

I can sing twenty more.

Yes, truly can I. I can sing The Broom

and Bonny Robin. Are not you a tailor?

Where’s my wedding gown?

Do, very rarely, I must be abroad else to

call the maids and pay the minstrels, for I must

lose my maidenhead by cocklight. ’Twill never

thrive else.

O fair, O sweet, etc.

Good e’en, good men. Pray, did you ever

hear of one young Palamon?

Is ’t not a fine young gentleman?

O , is he so? You have a sister.

But she shall never have him—tell her so—

for a trick that I know; you’d best look to her, for

if she see him once, she’s gone, she’s done and

undone in an hour. All the young maids of our

town are in love with him, but I laugh at ’em and

let ’em all alone. Is ’t not a wise course?

There is at least two hundred now with

child by him—there must be four; yet I keep close

for all this, close as a cockle; and all these must be

boys—he has the trick on ’t—and at ten years old

they must be all gelt for musicians and sing the

wars of Theseus.

As ever you heard, but say nothing.

They come from all parts of the dukedom

to him; I’ll warrant you, he had not so few last

night as twenty to dispatch. He’ll tickle ’t up in two

hours, if his hand be in.

Come hither; you are a wise

man.

You are master of a ship?

Where’s your compass?

Set it to th’ north. And now direct your

course to th’ wood, where Palamon lies longing for

me. For the tackling, let me alone.—Come, weigh,

my hearts, cheerly.

What kenn’st thou?

Bear for it, master. Tack about!

When Cynthia with her borrowed light, etc.

I have forgot it quite. The burden on ’t was

“down-a down-a,” and penned by no worse man

than Geraldo, Emilia’s schoolmaster. He’s as fantastical,

too, as ever he may go upon ’s legs, for in

the next world will Dido see Palamon, and then

will she be out of love with Aeneas.

Now for this charm that I told you of, you

must bring a piece of silver on the tip of your

tongue, or no ferry; then if it be your chance to

come where the blessed spirits are, there’s a

sight now! We maids that have our livers perished,

cracked to pieces with love, we shall come there,

and do nothing all day long but pick flowers with

Proserpine. Then will I make Palamon a nosegay;

then let him mark me then.

Faith, I’ll tell you, sometime we go to

barley-break, we of the blessed. Alas, ’tis a sore life

they have i’ th’ other place—such burning, frying,

boiling, hissing, howling, chatt’ring, cursing—O,

they have shrewd measure, take heed! If one be

mad, or hang or drown themselves, thither they

go, Jupiter bless us, and there shall we be put in

a cauldron of lead and usurers’ grease, amongst a

whole million of cutpurses, and there boil like a

gammon of bacon that will never be enough.

Lords and courtiers that have got maids

with child, they are in this place. They shall stand

in fire up to the navel and in ice up to th’ heart, and

there th’ offending part burns and the deceiving

part freezes: in troth, a very grievous punishment,

as one would think, for such a trifle. Believe me,

one would marry a leprous witch to be rid on ’t, I’ll

assure you.

To hear there a proud lady and a proud city

wife howl together—I were a beast an I’d call it

good sport. One cries “O this smoke!” th’ other,

“This fire!”; one cries, “O, that ever I did it behind

the arras!” and then howls; th’ other curses a suing

fellow and her garden house.

I will be true, my stars, my fate, etc.

I thank him for his gentle patience.

He’s a kind gentleman, and I am much bound to him.

Did you ne’er see the horse he gave me?

How do you like him?

You never saw him dance?

I have, often.

He dances very finely, very comely,

And for a jig, come cut and long tail to him,

He turns you like a top.

He’ll dance the morris twenty mile an hour,

And that will founder the best hobbyhorse,

If I have any skill, in all the parish,

And gallops to the tune of Light o’ love.

What think you of this horse?

Alas, that’s nothing.

A very fair hand, and casts himself th’ accounts

Of all his hay and provender. That hostler

Must rise betime that cozens him. You know

The chestnut mare the Duke has?

She is horribly in love with him, poor beast,

But he is like his master, coy and scornful.

Some two hundred bottles,

And twenty strike of oats, but he’ll ne’er have her.

He lisps in ’s neighing able to entice

A miller’s mare. He’ll be the death of her.

Yours to command i’ th’ way of honesty.—

How far is ’t now to th’ end o’ th’ world, my masters?

Will you go with me?

Why, play at stool-ball.

What is there else to do?

’Tis true,

For there, I will assure you, we shall find

Some blind priest for the purpose, that will venture

To marry us; for here they are nice and foolish.

Besides, my father must be hanged tomorrow,

And that would be a blot i’ th’ business.

Are not you Palamon?

Yes, but you care not for me; I have nothing

But this poor petticoat and two coarse smocks.

Will you surely?

We’ll to bed then.

O , sir, you would fain be nibbling.

’Tis a sweet one,

And will perfume me finely against the wedding.

Is not this your cousin Arcite?

Do you think he’ll have me?

Do you think so too?

We shall have many children. Lord, how you’re grown!

My Palamon, I hope, will grow too, finely,

Now he’s at liberty. Alas, poor chicken,

He was kept down with hard meat and ill lodging,

But I’ll kiss him up again.

And shall we kiss too?

And twenty.

And then we’ll sleep together.

But you shall not hurt me.

If you do, love, I’ll cry.

