


Her distraction is more at some time of the

moon than at other some, is it not?

What stuff’s here?

Poor soul.

How prettily she’s amiss! Note her a little

further.

How her brains coins!

How she continues this fancy! ’Tis not an engraffed

madness, but a most thick and profound

melancholy.

I think she has a perturbed mind, which I

cannot minister to.

Understand you she ever affected any man

ere she beheld Palamon?

That intemp’rate surfeit of her eye hath distempered

the other senses. They may return and

settle again to execute their preordained faculties,

but they are now in a most extravagant vagary.

This you must do: confine her to a place where

the light may rather seem to steal in than be

permitted.—Take upon you, young sir, her friend,

the name of Palamon; say you come to eat with

her, and to commune of love. This will catch her

attention, for this her mind beats upon; other

objects that are inserted ’tween her mind and eye

become the pranks and friskins of her madness.

Sing to her such green songs of love as she says

Palamon hath sung in prison. Come to her stuck

in as sweet flowers as the season is mistress of,

and thereto make an addition of some other compounded

odors which are grateful to the sense.

All this shall become Palamon, for Palamon can

sing, and Palamon is sweet and ev’ry good thing.

Desire to eat with her, carve her, drink to her, and

still among intermingle your petition of grace and

acceptance into her favor. Learn what maids have

been her companions and playferes, and let them

repair to her with Palamon in their mouths, and

appear with tokens, as if they suggested for him.—

It is a falsehood she is in, which is with falsehoods

to be combated. This may bring her to eat,

to sleep, and reduce what’s now out of square in

her into their former law and regiment. I have seen

it approved, how many times I know not, but to

make the number more, I have great hope in this.

I will between the passages of this project come

in with my appliance. Let us put it in execution

and hasten the success, which doubt not will bring

forth comfort.

Has this advice I told you done any good upon her?

’Twas well done; twenty times had been far better,

For there the cure lies mainly.

Let her do so,

And when your fit comes, fit her home,

And presently.

You did so?

’Twas very ill done, then.

You should observe her ev’ry way.

That’s all one, if you make a noise.

If she entreat again, do anything.

Lie with her, if she ask you.

Yes, in the way of cure.

That’s but a niceness.

Ne’er cast your child away for honesty.

Cure her first this way; then if she will be honest,

She has the path before her.

Pray bring her in

And let’s see how she is.

Go, go.

You fathers are fine fools. Her honesty?

And we should give her physic till we find that!

How old is she?

She may be.

But that’s all one; ’tis nothing to our purpose.

Whate’er her father says, if you perceive

Her mood inclining that way that I spoke of,

Videlicet, the way of flesh—you have me?

Please her appetite,

And do it home; it cures her, ipso facto,

The melancholy humor that infects her.

You’ll find it so.

She comes; pray humor her.

What stuff she utters!

Why, a day’s journey, wench.

Yes, sweetheart,

And I am glad my cousin Palamon

Has made so fair a choice.

Yes, without doubt.

Nay, we’ll go with you.

I will not lose the sight.

I’ll warrant you, within these three or four days

I’ll make her right again. You must not from her,

But still preserve her in this way.

Let’s get her in.

Take her offer.

