
Stand up.

Poor lady, say no more.

I had as lief trace this good action with you

As that whereto I am going, and never yet

Went I so willing way. My lord is taken

Heart-deep with your distress; let him consider.

I’ll speak anon.

Though much unlike

You should be so transported, as much sorry

I should be such a suitor, yet I think

Did I not, by th’ abstaining of my joy—

Which breeds a deeper longing—cure their surfeit

That craves a present med’cine, I should pluck

All ladies’ scandal on me. Therefore, sir,

As I shall here make trial of my prayers,

Either presuming them to have some force,

Or sentencing for aye their vigor dumb,

Prorogue this business we are going about, and hang

Your shield afore your heart—about that neck

Which is my fee, and which I freely lend

To do these poor queens service.

Sir, farewell. Repeat my wishes

To our great lord, of whose success I dare not

Make any timorous question; yet I wish him

Excess and overflow of power, an ’t might be,

To dure ill-dealing fortune. Speed to him.

Store never hurts good governors.

In ’s bosom.

We have been soldiers, and we cannot weep

When our friends don their helms or put to sea,

Or tell of babes broached on the lance, or women

That have sod their infants in—and after ate them—

The brine they wept at killing ’em. Then if

You stay to see of us such spinsters, we

Should hold you here forever.

With much labor,

And I did love him for ’t. They two have cabined

In many as dangerous as poor a corner,

Peril and want contending; they have skiffed

Torrents whose roaring tyranny and power

I’ th’ least of these was dreadful, and they have

Fought out together where Death’s self was lodged.

Yet fate hath brought them off. Their knot of love,

Tied, weaved, entangled, with so true, so long,

And with a finger of so deep a cunning,

May be outworn, never undone. I think

Theseus cannot be umpire to himself,

Cleaving his conscience into twain and doing

Each side like justice, which he loves best.

’Twas Flavina.

You’re out of breath,

And this high-speeded pace is but to say

That you shall never—like the maid Flavina—

Love any that’s called man.

Now, alack, weak sister,

I must no more believe thee in this point—

Though in ’t I know thou dost believe thyself—

Than I will trust a sickly appetite,

That loathes even as it longs. But sure, my sister,

If I were ripe for your persuasion, you

Have said enough to shake me from the arm

Of the all-noble Theseus, for whose fortunes

I will now in and kneel, with great assurance

That we, more than his Pirithous, possess

The high throne in his heart.

I admire him.

I have not seen so young a man so noble,

If he say true, of his sort.

But his body

And fiery mind illustrate a brave father.

He’s well got, sure.

Never so pleased, sir.

Alas, the pity! Now or never, sister,

Speak not to be denied. That face of yours

Will bear the curses else of after ages

For these lost cousins.

Sir, by our tie of marriage—

By that faith,

That fair hand, and that honest heart you gave me—

By valor;

By all the chaste nights I have ever pleased you—

By your own eyes; by strength,

In which you swore I went beyond all women,

Almost all men, and yet I yielded, Theseus—

Next hear my prayers—

Mercy.

What will become of ’em?

I wish it,

But not the cause, my lord. They would show

Bravely about the titles of two kingdoms;

’Tis pity love should be so tyrannous.—

O, my soft-hearted sister, what think you?

Weep not till they weep blood. Wench, it must be.

You must go.

Farewell, sister.

I am like to know your husband ’fore yourself

By some small start of time. He whom the gods

Do of the two know best, I pray them he

Be made your lot.

Infinite pity

That four such eyes should be so fixed on one

That two must needs be blind for ’t.

