


Fie, fie, what tediosity and disinsanity

is here among you! Have my rudiments been labored

so long with you, milked unto you, and, by a

figure, even the very plum broth and marrow of

my understanding laid upon you, and do you still

cry “Where?” and “How?” and “Wherefore?” You

most coarse-frieze capacities, you jean judgments,

have I said “Thus let be” and “There let be”

and “Then let be” and no man understand me? Proh

deum, medius fidius, you are all dunces! Forwhy,

here stand I; here the Duke comes; there are you,

close in the thicket; the Duke appears; I meet him

and unto him I utter learnèd things and many figures;

he hears, and nods, and hums, and then cries

“Rare!” and I go forward. At length I fling my cap

up—mark there! Then do you as once did Meleager

and the boar—break comely out before him;

like true lovers, cast yourselves in a body decently,

and sweetly, by a figure, trace and turn, boys.

But I say, where’s their women?

Where be your ribbons, maids? Swim

with your bodies, and carry it sweetly and deliverly,

and now and then a favor and a frisk.

Where’s the rest o’ th’ music?

Couple, then, and see what’s wanting.

Where’s the Bavian?—My friend, carry your tail

without offense or scandal to the ladies; and be

sure you tumble with audacity and manhood, and

when you bark, do it with judgment.

Quo usque tandem? Here is a woman

wanting.

We have, as learnèd authors utter,

washed a tile; we have been fatuus and labored

vainly.

An eel and woman, a learnèd poet

says, unless by th’ tail and with thy teeth thou hold,

will either fail. In manners, this was false

position.

Nothing. Our business is become a

nullity, yea, and a woeful and a piteous nullity.

And are you mad,

good woman?

Why?

Dii boni! A tinker, damsel?

Go, take her, and fluently persuade her

to a peace. Et opus exegi, quod nec Iovis ira, nec

ignis. Strike up, and lead her in.

Persuasively, and cunningly.

Away, boys! I hear the horns. Give me some

meditation, and mark your cue.

Pallas, inspire me!

Stay, and edify!

Thou doughty duke, all hail!—All hail, sweet ladies!

If you but favor, our country pastime made is.

We are a few of those collected here

That ruder tongues distinguish “villager.”

And to say verity, and not to fable,

We are a merry rout, or else a rabble,

Or company, or by a figure, chorus,

That ’fore thy dignity will dance a morris.

And I that am the rectifier of all,

By title pedagogus, that let fall

The birch upon the breeches of the small ones,

And humble with a ferula the tall ones,

Do here present this machine, or this frame.

And, dainty duke, whose doughty dismal fame

From Dis to Daedalus, from post to pillar,

Is blown abroad, help me, thy poor well-willer,

And with thy twinkling eyes look right and straight

Upon this mighty “Morr,” of mickle weight—

“Is” now comes in, which being glued together

Makes “Morris,” and the cause that we came hither.

The body of our sport, of no small study,

I first appear, though rude, and raw, and muddy,

To speak before thy noble grace this tenner,

At whose great feet I offer up my penner.

The next, the Lord of May and Lady bright,

The Chambermaid and Servingman by night

That seek out silent hanging; then mine Host

And his fat Spouse, that welcomes to their cost

The gallèd traveler, and with a beck’ning

Informs the tapster to inflame the reck’ning;

Then the beest-eating Clown; and next the Fool,

The Bavian with long tail and eke long tool,

Cum multis aliis that make a dance;

Say “ay,” and all shall presently advance.

Intrate, filii. Come forth and foot it.

Ladies, if we have been merry

And have pleased ye with a derry,

And a derry and a down,

Say the Schoolmaster’s no clown.—

Duke, if we have pleased thee too

And have done as good boys should do,

Give us but a tree or twain

For a Maypole, and again,

Ere another year run out,

We’ll make thee laugh, and all this rout.

May the stag thou hunt’st stand long,

And thy dogs be swift and strong;

May they kill him without lets,

And the ladies eat his dowsets.

Come, we are all made. Dii deaeque omnes,

You have danced rarely, wenches.

