
No knees to me.

What woman I may stead that is distressed

Does bind me to her.

Pray stand up.

Your grief is written in your cheek.

Pray you say nothing, pray you.

Who cannot feel nor see the rain, being in ’t,

Knows neither wet nor dry. If that you were

The groundpiece of some painter, I would buy you

T’ instruct me ’gainst a capital grief—indeed,

Such heart-pierced demonstration. But, alas,

Being a natural sister of our sex,

Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me

That it shall make a counter-reflect ’gainst

My brother’s heart and warm it to some pity,

Though it were made of stone. Pray have good comfort.

If you grant not

My sister her petition in that force,

With that celerity and nature which

She makes it in, from henceforth I’ll not dare

To ask you anything, nor be so hardy

Ever to take a husband.

Thanks, sir. Remember me

To our all-royal brother, for whose speed

The great Bellona I’ll solicit; and

Since in our terrene state petitions are not

Without gifts understood, I’ll offer to her

What I shall be advised she likes. Our hearts

Are in his army, in his tent.

How his longing

Follows his friend! Since his depart, his sports,

Though craving seriousness and skill, passed slightly

His careless execution, where nor gain

Made him regard, or loss consider, but

Playing one business in his hand, another

Directing in his head, his mind nurse equal

To these so diff’ring twins. Have you observed him

Since our great lord departed?

Doubtless

There is a best, and reason has no manners

To say it is not you. I was acquainted

Once with a time when I enjoyed a playfellow;

You were at wars when she the grave enriched,

Who made too proud the bed; took leave o’ th’ moon,

Which then looked pale at parting, when our count

Was each eleven.

Yes.

You talk of Pirithous’ and Theseus’ love.

Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasoned,

More buckled with strong judgment, and their needs

The one of th’ other may be said to water

Their intertangled roots of love. But I,

And she I sigh and spoke of, were things innocent,

Loved for we did, and like the elements

That know not what nor why, yet do effect

Rare issues by their operance, our souls

Did so to one another. What she liked

Was then of me approved, what not, condemned,

No more arraignment. The flower that I would pluck

And put between my breasts—O, then but beginning

To swell about the blossom—she would long

Till she had such another, and commit it

To the like innocent cradle, where, Phoenix-like,

They died in perfume. On my head no toy

But was her pattern; her affections—pretty,

Though haply hers careless were—I followed

For my most serious decking. Had mine ear

Stol’n some new air, or at adventure hummed one

From musical coinage, why, it was a note

Whereon her spirits would sojourn—rather, dwell on—

And sing it in her slumbers. This rehearsal—

Which fury-innocent wots well comes in

Like old importment’s bastard—has this end,

That the true love ’tween maid and maid may be

More than in sex individual.

I am sure I shall not.

I am not

Against your faith, yet I continue mine.

This garden has a world of pleasures in ’t.

What flower is this?

That was a fair boy certain, but a fool

To love himself. Were there not maids enough?

Or were they all hard-hearted?

Thou wouldst not.

That’s a good wench.

But take heed to your kindness, though.

Men are mad things.

Canst not thou work such flowers in silk, wench?

I’ll have a gown full of ’em, and of these.

This is pretty color. Will ’t not do

Rarely upon a skirt, wench?

Of all flowers

Methinks a rose is best.

It is the very emblem of a maid.

For when the west wind courts her gently,

How modestly she blows and paints the sun

With her chaste blushes! When the north comes near her,

Rude and impatient, then, like chastity,

She locks her beauties in her bud again,

And leaves him to base briers.

Thou art wanton!

The sun grows high. Let’s walk in. Keep these flowers.

We’ll see how near art can come near their colors.

I am wondrous merry-hearted. I could laugh now.

And take one with you?

Well, agree then.

He is so.

Believe,

His mother was a wondrous handsome woman;

His face, methinks, goes that way.

That were too cruel.

If you deserve well, sir, I shall soon see ’t.

You’re mine, and somewhat better than your rank

I’ll use you.

That were a shame, sir,

While I have horses.—Take your choice, and what

You want at any time, let me but know it.

If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you

You’ll find a loving mistress.

I hope too wise for that, sir.

’Twas an excellent dance,

And, for a preface, I never heard a better.

In my face, dear sister,

I find no anger to ’em, nor no ruin.

The misadventure of their own eyes kill ’em.

Yet that I will be woman and have pity,

My knees shall grow to th’ ground but I’ll get mercy.

Help me, dear sister; in a deed so virtuous,

The powers of all women will be with us.

Most royal brother—

By your own spotless honor—

By that you would have pity in another;

By your own virtues infinite—

By that you would have trembled to deny

A blushing maid—

Last let me entreat, sir—

Mercy on these princes.

Upon their lives, but with their banishments.

O, my noble brother,

That oath was rashly made, and in your anger;

Your reason will not hold it. If such vows

Stand for express will, all the world must perish.

Besides, I have another oath ’gainst yours,

Of more authority, I am sure more love,

Not made in passion neither, but good heed.

That you would ne’er deny me anything

Fit for my modest suit and your free granting.

I tie you to your word now; if you fail in ’t,

Think how you maim your honor—

For now I am set a-begging, sir, I am deaf

To all but your compassion—how their lives

Might breed the ruin of my name. Opinion!

Shall anything that loves me perish for me?

That were a cruel wisdom. Do men prune

The straight young boughs that blush with thousand blossoms

Because they may be rotten? O, Duke Theseus,

The goodly mothers that have groaned for these,

And all the longing maids that ever loved,

If your vow stand, shall curse me and my beauty,

And in their funeral songs for these two cousins

Despise my cruelty, and cry woe worth me,

Till I am nothing but the scorn of women.

For heaven’s sake, save their lives, and banish ’em.

Swear ’em never more

To make me their contention, or to know me,

To tread upon thy dukedom, and to be,

Wherever they shall travel, ever strangers

To one another.

I cannot, sir; they are both too excellent.

For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.

Yes, I must, sir,

Else both miscarry.

Yet I may bind those wounds up that must open

And bleed to death for my sake else. I’ll choose,

And end their strife. Two such young handsome men

Shall never fall for me; their weeping mothers,

Following the dead cold ashes of their sons,

Shall never curse my cruelty.  Good heaven,

What a sweet face has Arcite! If wise Nature,

With all her best endowments, all those beauties

She sows into the births of noble bodies,

Were here a mortal woman, and had in her

The coy denials of young maids, yet doubtless

She would run mad for this man. What an eye,

Of what a fiery sparkle and quick sweetness,

Has this young prince! Here Love himself sits smiling;

Just such another wanton Ganymede

Set Jove afire with, and enforced the god

Snatch up the goodly boy and set him by him,

A shining constellation. What a brow,

Of what a spacious majesty, he carries,

Arched like the great-eyed Juno’s but far sweeter,

Smoother than Pelops’ shoulder! Fame and Honor,

Methinks, from hence as from a promontory

Pointed in heaven, should clap their wings and sing

To all the under world the loves and fights

Of gods and such men near ’em.  Palamon

Is but his foil, to him a mere dull shadow;

He’s swart and meager, of an eye as heavy

As if he had lost his mother; a still temper,

No stirring in him, no alacrity;

Of all this sprightly sharpness not a smile.

Yet these that we count errors may become him;

Narcissus was a sad boy but a heavenly.

O, who can find the bent of woman’s fancy?

I am a fool; my reason is lost in me;

I have no choice, and I have lied so lewdly

That women ought to beat me. On my knees

I ask thy pardon: Palamon, thou art alone

And only beautiful, and these the eyes,

These the bright lamps of beauty, that command

And threaten love, and what young maid dare cross ’em?

What a bold gravity, and yet inviting,

Has this brown manly face! O Love, this only

From this hour is complexion. Lie there, Arcite.

Thou art a changeling to him, a mere gypsy,

And this the noble body. I am sotted,

Utterly lost. My virgin’s faith has fled me.

For if my brother but even now had asked me

Whether I loved, I had run mad for Arcite.

Now, if my sister, more for Palamon.

Stand both together. Now, come ask me, brother.

Alas, I know not! Ask me now, sweet sister.

I may go look! What a mere child is Fancy,

That, having two fair gauds of equal sweetness,

Cannot distinguish, but must cry for both.

How now, sir?

To end the quarrel?

Would I might end first!

What sins have I committed, chaste Diana,

That my unspotted youth must now be soiled

With blood of princes, and my chastity

Be made the altar where the lives of lovers—

Two greater and two better never yet

Made mothers joy—must be the sacrifice

To my unhappy beauty?

I had rather both,

So neither for my sake should fall untimely.

Must these men die too?

Poor wench, go weep, for whosoever wins

Loses a noble cousin for thy sins.

O sacred, shadowy, cold, and constant queen,

Abandoner of revels, mute contemplative,

Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure

As wind-fanned snow, who to thy female knights

Allow’st no more blood than will make a blush,

Which is their order’s robe, I here, thy priest,

Am humbled ’fore thine altar. O, vouchsafe

With that thy rare green eye, which never yet

Beheld thing maculate, look on thy virgin,

And, sacred silver mistress, lend thine ear—

Which ne’er heard scurrile term, into whose port

Ne’er entered wanton sound—to my petition,

Seasoned with holy fear. This is my last

Of vestal office. I am bride-habited

But maiden-hearted. A husband I have ’pointed,

But do not know him. Out of two I should

Choose one, and pray for his success, but I

Am guiltless of election. Of mine eyes,

Were I to lose one—they are equal precious—

I could doom neither; that which perished should

Go to ’t unsentenced. Therefore, most modest queen,

He of the two pretenders that best loves me

And has the truest title in ’t, let him

Take off my wheaten garland, or else grant

The file and quality I hold I may

Continue in thy band.

See what our general of ebbs and flows

Out from the bowels of her holy altar

With sacred act advances: but one rose.

If well inspired, this battle shall confound

Both these brave knights, and I, a virgin flower,

Must grow alone unplucked.

The flower is fall’n, the tree descends. O mistress,

Thou here dischargest me. I shall be gathered;

I think so, but I know not thine own will.

Unclasp thy mystery!—I hope she’s pleased;

Her signs were gracious.

I’ll no step further.

I had rather see a wren hawk at a fly

Than this decision; ev’ry blow that falls

Threats a brave life; each stroke laments

The place whereon it falls, and sounds more like

A bell than blade. I will stay here.

It is enough my hearing shall be punished

With what shall happen, ’gainst the which there is

No deafing but to hear; not taint mine eye

With dread sights it may shun.

Pardon me.

If I were there, I’d wink.

I am extinct;

There is but envy in that light which shows

The one the other. Darkness, which ever was

The dam of horror, who does stand accursed

Of many mortal millions, may even now,

By casting her black mantle over both,

That neither could find other, get herself

Some part of a good name, and many a murder

Set off whereto she’s guilty.

In faith, I will not.

Sir, pardon me.

The title of a kingdom may be tried

Out of itself.

Arcite is gently visaged, yet his eye

Is like an engine bent, or a sharp weapon

In a soft sheath; mercy and manly courage

Are bedfellows in his visage. Palamon

Has a most menacing aspect; his brow

Is graved, and seems to bury what it frowns on;

Yet sometimes ’tis not so, but alters to

The quality of his thoughts. Long time his eye

Will dwell upon his object. Melancholy

Becomes him nobly; so does Arcite’s mirth;

But Palamon’s sadness is a kind of mirth,

So mingled, as if mirth did make him sad

And sadness merry. Those darker humors that

Stick misbecomingly on others, on them

Live in fair dwelling.

Hark how yon spurs to spirit do incite

The princes to their proof! Arcite may win me,

And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to

The spoiling of his figure. O, what pity

Enough for such a chance? If I were by,

I might do hurt, for they would glance their eyes

Towards my seat, and in that motion might

Omit a ward or forfeit an offense

Which craved that very time.  It is much better

I am not there. O, better never born

Than minister to such harm!    What is the chance?

Then he has won. ’Twas ever likely.

He looked all grace and success, and he is

Doubtless the prim’st of men. I prithee run

And tell me how it goes.

Run and inquire. Poor servant, thou hast lost.

Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,

Palamon’s on the left—why so, I know not.

I had no end in ’t else; chance would have it so.

On the sinister side the heart lies; Palamon

Had the best-boding chance.  This burst of clamor

Is sure th’ end o’ th’ combat.

Were they metamorphosed

Both into one—O, why, there were no woman

Worth so composed a man! Their single share,

Their nobleness peculiar to them, gives

The prejudice of disparity, value’s shortness,

To any lady breathing.  More exulting?

“Palamon” still?

I prithee lay attention to the cry;

Set both thine ears to th’ business.

Half-sights saw

That Arcite was no babe. God’s lid, his richness

And costliness of spirit looked through him; it could

No more be hid in him than fire in flax,

Than humble banks can go to law with waters

That drift-winds force to raging. I did think

Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not

Why I did think so. Our reasons are not prophets

When oft our fancies are. They are coming off.

Alas, poor Palamon!

Is this winning?

O all you heavenly powers, where is your mercy?

But that your wills have said it must be so,

And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,

This miserable prince, that cuts away

A life more worthy from him than all women,

I should and would die too.

I’ll close thine eyes, prince. Blessed souls be with thee!

Thou art a right good man, and while I live,

This day I give to tears.

