
Your advice

Is cried up with example. What strange ruins,

Since first we went to school, may we perceive

Walking in Thebes! Scars and bare weeds

The gain o’ th’ martialist, who did propound

To his bold ends honor and golden ingots,

Which though he won, he had not, and now flirted

By peace for whom he fought. Who then shall offer

To Mars’s so-scorned altar? I do bleed

When such I meet, and wish great Juno would

Resume her ancient fit of jealousy

To get the soldier work, that peace might purge

For her repletion, and retain anew

Her charitable heart, now hard and harsher

Than strife or war could be.

Yes, I pity

Decays where’er I find them, but such most

That, sweating in an honorable toil,

Are paid with ice to cool ’em.

’Tis in our power—

Unless we fear that apes can tutor ’s—to

Be masters of our manners. What need I

Affect another’s gait, which is not catching

Where there is faith? Or to be fond upon

Another’s way of speech, when by mine own

I may be reasonably conceived—saved too,

Speaking it truly? Why am I bound

By any generous bond to follow him

Follows his tailor, haply so long until

The followed make pursuit? Or let me know

Why mine own barber is unblessed, with him

My poor chin too, for ’tis not scissored just

To such a favorite’s glass? What canon is there

That does command my rapier from my hip

To dangle ’t in my hand, or to go tiptoe

Before the street be foul? Either I am

The forehorse in the team, or I am none

That draw i’ th’ sequent trace. These poor slight sores

Need not a plantain. That which rips my bosom

Almost to th’ heart’s—

He.

A most unbounded tyrant, whose successes

Makes heaven unfeared and villainy assured

Beyond its power there’s nothing; almost puts

Faith in a fever, and deifies alone

Voluble chance; who only attributes

The faculties of other instruments

To his own nerves and act; commands men service,

And what they win in ’t, boot and glory; one

That fears not to do harm; good, dares not. Let

The blood of mine that’s sib to him be sucked

From me with leeches; let them break and fall

Off me with that corruption.

Nothing truer.

I think the echoes of his shames have deafed

The ears of heav’nly justice. Widows’ cries

Descend again into their throats and have not

Due audience of the gods.    Valerius.

Small winds shake him.

But what’s the matter?

Leave that unreasoned.

Our services stand now for Thebes, not Creon.

Yet to be neutral to him were dishonor,

Rebellious to oppose. Therefore we must

With him stand to the mercy of our fate,

Who hath bounded our last minute.

Let’s to the King, who, were he

A quarter carrier of that honor which

His enemy come in, the blood we venture

Should be as for our health, which were not spent,

Rather laid out for purchase. But alas,

Our hands advanced before our hearts, what will

The fall o’ th’ stroke do damage?

How do you, noble cousin?

Why, strong enough to laugh at misery

And bear the chance of war; yet we are prisoners

I fear forever, cousin.

O, cousin Arcite,

Where is Thebes now? Where is our noble country?

Where are our friends and kindreds? Never more

Must we behold those comforts, never see

The hardy youths strive for the games of honor,

Hung with the painted favors of their ladies,

Like tall ships under sail; then start amongst ’em

And as an east wind leave ’em all behind us,

Like lazy clouds, whilst Palamon and Arcite,

Even in the wagging of a wanton leg,

Outstripped the people’s praises, won the garlands

Ere they have time to wish ’em ours. O, never

Shall we two exercise, like twins of honor,

Our arms again, and feel our fiery horses

Like proud seas under us. Our good swords now—

Better the red-eyed god of war ne’er wore—

Ravished our sides, like age must run to rust

And deck the temples of those gods that hate us;

These hands shall never draw ’em out like lightning

To blast whole armies more.

’Tis too true, Arcite. To our Theban hounds

That shook the agèd forest with their echoes

No more now must we halloo; no more shake

Our pointed javelins whilst the angry swine

Flies like a Parthian quiver from our rages,

Struck with our well-steeled darts. All valiant uses,

The food and nourishment of noble minds,

In us two here shall perish; we shall die,

Which is the curse of honor, lastly,

Children of grief and ignorance.

Certainly

’Tis a main goodness, cousin, that our fortunes

Were twined together. ’Tis most true, two souls

Put in two noble bodies, let ’em suffer

The gall of hazard, so they grow together,

Will never sink; they must not, say they could.

A willing man dies sleeping and all’s done.

How, gentle cousin?

You have made me—

I thank you, cousin Arcite—almost wanton

With my captivity. What a misery

It is to live abroad and everywhere!

’Tis like a beast, methinks. I find the court here,

I am sure, a more content; and all those pleasures

That woo the wills of men to vanity

I see through now, and am sufficient

To tell the world ’tis but a gaudy shadow

That old Time as he passes by takes with him.

What had we been, old in the court of Creon,

Where sin is justice, lust and ignorance

The virtues of the great ones? Cousin Arcite,

Had not the loving gods found this place for us,

We had died as they do, ill old men, unwept,

And had their epitaphs, the people’s curses.

Shall I say more?

You shall.

Is there record of any two that loved

Better than we do, Arcite?

I do not think it possible our friendship

Should ever leave us.

Yes.

Never till now I was in prison, Arcite.

Behold, and wonder!

By heaven, she is a goddess.

Do reverence.

She is a goddess, Arcite.

She is all the beauty extant.

What think you of this beauty?

Is ’t but a rare one?

Might not a man well lose himself and love her?

You love her, then?

And desire her?

I saw her first.

But it shall be.

Yes, but you must not love her.

You shall not love at all.

I, that first saw her; I that took possession

First with mine eye of all those beauties

In her revealed to mankind. If thou lov’st her,

Or entertain’st a hope to blast my wishes,

Thou art a traitor, Arcite, and a fellow

False as thy title to her. Friendship, blood,

And all the ties between us I disclaim

If thou once think upon her.

Have I called thee friend?

Yes.

You may be.

No, but unjust

If thou pursue that sight.

Yes, if he be but one.

Let that one say so,

And use thy freedom. Else, if thou pursuest her,

Be as that cursèd man that hates his country,

A branded villain.

I must be.

Till thou art worthy, Arcite, it concerns me.

And in this madness if I hazard thee

And take thy life, I deal but truly.

O, that now, that now,

Thy false self and thy friend had but this fortune

To be one hour at liberty, and grasp

Our good swords in our hands, I would quickly teach thee

What ’twere to filch affection from another.

Thou art baser in it than a cutpurse.

Put but thy head out of this window more

And, as I have a soul, I’ll nail thy life to ’t.

No more; the keeper’s coming. I shall live

To knock thy brains out with my shackles.

Now, honest keeper?

And me too,

Even when you please, of life.—Why is he sent for?

It may be he shall marry her; he’s goodly,

And like enough the Duke hath taken notice

Both of his blood and body. But his falsehood!

Why should a friend be treacherous? If that

Get him a wife so noble and so fair,

Let honest men ne’er love again. Once more

I would but see this fair one. Blessèd garden

And fruit and flowers more blessèd that still blossom

As her bright eyes shine on you, would I were,

For all the fortune of my life hereafter,

Yon little tree, yon blooming apricock!

How I would spread and fling my wanton arms

In at her window; I would bring her fruit

Fit for the gods to feed on; youth and pleasure

Still as she tasted should be doubled on her;

And, if she be not heavenly, I would make her

So near the gods in nature, they should fear her.

And then I am sure she would love me.—How now, keeper,

Where’s Arcite?

He’s a blessèd man.

He shall see Thebes again, and call to arms

The bold young men that, when he bids ’em charge,

Fall on like fire. Arcite shall have a fortune,

If he dare make himself a worthy lover,

Yet in the field to strike a battle for her,

And, if he lose her then, he’s a cold coward.

How bravely may he bear himself to win her

If he be noble Arcite—thousand ways!

Were I at liberty, I would do things

Of such a virtuous greatness that this lady,

This blushing virgin, should take manhood to her

And seek to ravish me.

To discharge my life?

Devils take ’em

That are so envious to me! Prithee, kill me.

By this good light,

Had I a sword I would kill thee.

Thou bringst such pelting, scurvy news continually,

Thou art not worthy life. I will not go.

May I see the garden?

Then I am resolved, I will not go.

Do, good keeper.

I’ll shake ’em so, you shall not sleep;

I’ll make you a new morris. Must I go?

Farewell, kind window.

May rude wind never hurt thee. O, my lady,

If ever thou hast felt what sorrow was,

Dream how I suffer.—Come; now bury me.

Traitor kinsman,

Thou shouldst perceive my passion if these signs

Of prisonment were off me, and this hand

But owner of a sword. By all oaths in one,

I and the justice of my love would make thee

A confessed traitor, O thou most perfidious

That ever gently looked, the void’st of honor

That e’er bore gentle token, falsest cousin

That ever blood made kin! Call’st thou her thine?

I’ll prove it in my shackles, with these hands,

Void of appointment, that thou liest, and art

A very thief in love, a chaffy lord,

Nor worth the name of villain. Had I a sword,

And these house clogs away—

Cozener Arcite, give me language such

As thou hast showed me feat.

That thou durst, Arcite!

Sir,

I have seen you move in such a place which well

Might justify your manhood; you were called

A good knight and a bold. But the whole week’s not fair

If any day it rain; their valiant temper

Men lose when they incline to treachery,

And then they fight like compelled bears—would fly

Were they not tied.

Come up to me;

Quit me of these cold gyves, give me a sword

Though it be rusty, and the charity

Of one meal lend me. Come before me then,

A good sword in thy hand, and do but say

That Emily is thine, I will forgive

The trespass thou hast done me—yea, my life,

If then thou carry ’t; and brave souls in shades

That have died manly, which will seek of me

Some news from Earth, they shall get none but this:

That thou art brave and noble.

O you heavens, dares any

So noble bear a guilty business? None

But only Arcite. Therefore none but Arcite

In this kind is so bold.

I do embrace you and your offer; for

Your offer do ’t I only. Sir, your person

Without hypocrisy I may not wish

More than my sword’s edge on ’t.

Pray hold your promise,

And do the deed with a bent brow. Most certain

You love me not; be rough with me, and pour

This oil out of your language. By this air,

I could for each word give a cuff, my stomach

Not reconciled by reason.

Sir, your attendance

Cannot please heaven, and I know your office

Unjustly is achieved.

But this one word:

You are going now to gaze upon my mistress,

For note you, mine she is—

Nay, pray you,

You talk of feeding me to breed me strength.

You are going now to look upon a sun

That strengthens what it looks on; there

You have a vantage o’er me, but enjoy ’t till

I may enforce my remedy. Farewell.

Arcite?

Nor none so honest, Arcite.

Arcite, thou mightst now poison me.

Do!

Well, sir, I’ll pledge you.

Stay, I’ll tell you

After a draught or two more.

Yes.

I am gladder

I have so good meat to ’t.

Yes, for them

That have wild consciences.

Not much.

But if it did, yours is too tart, sweet cousin.

What is this?

’Tis a lusty meat.

Give me more wine. Here, Arcite, to the wenches

We have known in our days!  The Lord Steward’s daughter!

Do you remember her?

She loved a black-haired man.

And I have heard some call him Arcite, and—

She met him in an arbor.

What did she there, coz? Play o’ th’ virginals?

Made her groan a month for ’t—

Or two, or three, or ten.

Yes.

For Emily, upon my life! Fool,

Away with this strained mirth. I say again

That sigh was breathed for Emily. Base cousin,

Dar’st thou break first?

By heaven and Earth,

There’s nothing in thee honest.

As thou mak’st me, traitor.

A sword and armor.

Sirrah—

If he keep touch, he dies for ’t.

About this hour my cousin gave his faith

To visit me again, and with him bring

Two swords and two good armors. If he fail,

He’s neither man nor soldier. When he left me,

I did not think a week could have restored

My lost strength to me, I was grown so low

And crestfall’n with my wants. I thank thee, Arcite,

Thou art yet a fair foe, and I feel myself,

With this refreshing, able once again

To outdure danger. To delay it longer

Would make the world think, when it comes to hearing,

That I lay fatting like a swine to fight

And not a soldier. Therefore, this blest morning

Shall be the last; and that sword he refuses,

If it but hold, I kill him with. ’Tis justice.

So, love and fortune for me!    O, good morrow.

I have put you

To too much pains, sir.

Would you were so in all, sir; I could wish you

As kind a kinsman as you force me find

A beneficial foe, that my embraces

Might thank you, not my blows.

Then I shall quit you.

Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy

That no man but thy cousin’s fit to kill thee.

I am well and lusty. Choose your arms.

Wilt thou exceed in all, or dost thou do it

To make me spare thee?

That’s well said.

Then, as I am an honest man and love

With all the justice of affection,

I’ll pay thee soundly. This I’ll take.

Do. Pray thee tell me, cousin,

Where got’st thou this good armor?

No.

I have worn a lighter,

But I shall make it serve.

By any means.

No, no, we’ll use no horses. I perceive

You would fain be at that fight.

Faith, so am I. Good cousin, thrust the buckle

Through far enough.

My casque now.

We shall be the nimbler.

Thank you, Arcite.

How do I look? Am I fall’n much away?

I’ll warrant thee, I’ll strike home.

Now to you, sir.

Methinks this armor’s very like that, Arcite,

Thou wor’st that day the three kings fell, but lighter.

You had, indeed;

A bright bay, I remember.

More by virtue;

You are modest, cousin.

But still before that flew

The lightning of your valor. Stay a little;

Is not this piece too strait?

I would have nothing hurt thee but my sword.

A bruise would be dishonor.

Stand off, then.

I thank you, no; keep it; your life lies on it.

Here’s one; if it but hold, I ask no more

For all my hopes. My cause and honor guard me!

This only, and no more: thou art mine aunt’s son.

And that blood we desire to shed is mutual—

In me thine, and in thee mine. My sword

Is in my hand, and if thou kill’st me,

The gods and I forgive thee. If there be

A place prepared for those that sleep in honor,

I wish his weary soul that falls may win it.

Fight bravely, cousin. Give me thy noble hand.

I commend thee.

Farewell, Arcite.

Why?

No, no, cousin,

I will no more be hidden, nor put off

This great adventure to a second trial.

I know your cunning, and I know your cause.

He that faints now, shame take him! Put thyself

Upon thy present guard—

Or I will make th’ advantage of this hour

Mine own, and what to come shall threaten me

I fear less than my fortune. Know, weak cousin,

I love Emilia, and in that I’ll bury

Thee and all crosses else.

Look to thine own well, Arcite.

Hold thy word, Theseus.

We are certainly both traitors, both despisers

Of thee and of thy goodness. I am Palamon,

That cannot love thee, he that broke thy prison.

Think well what that deserves. And this is Arcite.

A bolder traitor never trod thy ground,

A falser ne’er seemed friend. This is the man

Was begged and banished; this is he contemns thee

And what thou dar’st do; and in this disguise,

Against thine own edict, follows thy sister,

That fortunate bright star, the fair Emilia,

Whose servant—if there be a right in seeing

And first bequeathing of the soul to—justly

I am; and, which is more, dares think her his.

This treachery, like a most trusty lover,

I called him now to answer. If thou be’st

As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,

The true decider of all injuries,

Say “Fight again,” and thou shalt see me, Theseus,

Do such a justice thou thyself wilt envy.

Then take my life; I’ll woo thee to ’t.

Thou shalt have pity of us both, O Theseus,

If unto neither thou show mercy. Stop,

As thou art just, thy noble ear against us;

As thou art valiant, for thy cousin’s soul,

Whose twelve strong labors crown his memory,

Let’s die together at one instant, duke;

Only a little let him fall before me,

That I may tell my soul he shall not have her.

I’ll be cut a-pieces

Before I take this oath! Forget I love her?

O, all you gods, despise me then! Thy banishment

I not mislike, so we may fairly carry

Our swords and cause along; else never trifle,

But take our lives, duke. I must love, and will,

And for that love must and dare kill this cousin

On any piece the Earth has.

He’s a villain, then.

With all our souls.

Any death thou canst invent, duke.

If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favor,

And lovers yet unborn shall bless my ashes.

Yes.—Here, Cousin Arcite,

I am friends again till that hour.

We dare not fail thee, Theseus.

The glass is running now that cannot finish

Till one of us expire. Think you but thus,

That were there aught in me which strove to show

Mine enemy in this business, were ’t one eye

Against another, arm oppressed by arm,

I would destroy th’ offender, coz—I would

Though parcel of myself. Then from this gather

How I should tender you.

You speak well.

Before I turn, let me embrace thee, cousin.

This I shall never do again.

Why, let it be so. Farewell, coz.

Our stars must glister with new fire, or be

Today extinct. Our argument is love,

Which, if the goddess of it grant, she gives

Victory too. Then blend your spirits with mine,

You whose free nobleness do make my cause

Your personal hazard. To the goddess Venus

Commend we our proceeding, and implore

Her power unto our party.

Hail, sovereign queen of secrets, who hast power

To call the fiercest tyrant from his rage

And weep unto a girl; that hast the might

Even with an eye-glance to choke Mars’s drum

And turn th’ alarm to whispers; that canst make

A cripple flourish with his crutch, and cure him

Before Apollo; that mayst force the king

To be his subject’s vassal, and induce

Stale gravity to dance. The polled bachelor,

Whose youth, like wanton boys through bonfires,

Have skipped thy flame, at seventy thou canst catch,

And make him, to the scorn of his hoarse throat,

Abuse young lays of love. What godlike power

Hast thou not power upon? To Phoebus thou

Add’st flames hotter than his; the heavenly fires

Did scorch his mortal son, thine him. The huntress,

All moist and cold, some say, began to throw

Her bow away and sigh. Take to thy grace

Me, thy vowed soldier, who do bear thy yoke

As ’twere a wreath of roses, yet is heavier

Than lead itself, stings more than nettles.

I have never been foul-mouthed against thy law,

Ne’er revealed secret, for I knew none—would not,

Had I kenned all that were. I never practiced

Upon man’s wife, nor would the libels read

Of liberal wits. I never at great feasts

Sought to betray a beauty, but have blushed

At simp’ring sirs that did. I have been harsh

To large confessors, and have hotly asked them

If they had mothers—I had one, a woman,

And women ’twere they wronged. I knew a man

Of eighty winters—this I told them—who

A lass of fourteen brided; ’twas thy power

To put life into dust. The agèd cramp

Had screwed his square foot round;

The gout had knit his fingers into knots;

Torturing convulsions from his globy eyes

Had almost drawn their spheres, that what was life

In him seemed torture. This anatomy

Had by his young fair fere a boy, and I

Believed it was his, for she swore it was,

And who would not believe her? Brief, I am

To those that prate and have done, no companion;

To those that boast and have not, a defier;

To those that would and cannot, a rejoicer.

Yea, him I do not love that tells close offices

The foulest way, nor names concealments in

The boldest language. Such a one I am,

And vow that lover never yet made sigh

Truer than I. O, then, most soft sweet goddess,

Give me the victory of this question, which

Is true love’s merit, and bless me with a sign

Of thy great pleasure.

O thou that from eleven to ninety reign’st

In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world

And we in herds thy game, I give thee thanks

For this fair token, which being laid unto

Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance

My body to this business.—Let us rise

And bow before the goddess. Time comes on.

There’s many a man alive that hath outlived

The love o’ th’ people; yea, i’ th’ selfsame state

Stands many a father with his child. Some comfort

We have by so considering. We expire,

And not without men’s pity. To live still,

Have their good wishes; we prevent

The loathsome misery of age, beguile

The gout and rheum that in lag hours attend

For gray approachers; we come towards the gods

Young and unwappered, not halting under crimes

Many and stale. That sure shall please the gods

Sooner than such, to give us nectar with ’em,

For we are more clear spirits. My dear kinsmen,

Whose lives for this poor comfort are laid down,

You have sold ’em too too cheap.

E’en he that led you to this banquet shall

Taste to you all. Ah ha, my friend, my friend,

Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;

You’ll see ’t done now forever. Pray, how does she?

I heard she was not well; her kind of ill

Gave me some sorrow.

By my short life,

I am most glad on ’t. ’Tis the latest thing

I shall be glad of; prithee, tell her so.

Commend me to her, and to piece her portion,

Tender her this.

Verily, I think so.

A right good creature, more to me deserving

Than I can quit or speak of.

Adieu, and let my life be now as short

As my leave-taking.

Can that be,

When Venus, I have said, is false? How do things fare?

What

Hath waked us from our dream?

O, miserable end of our alliance!

The gods are mighty, Arcite. If thy heart,

Thy worthy, manly heart, be yet unbroken,

Give me thy last words. I am Palamon,

One that yet loves thee dying.

Thy brave soul seek Elysium!

And I to honor.

O cousin,

That we should things desire which do cost us

The loss of our desire, that naught could buy

Dear love but loss of dear love.

