


With due observance of thy godlike seat,

Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply

Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance

Lies the true proof of men. The sea being smooth,

How many shallow bauble boats dare sail

Upon her patient breast, making their way

With those of nobler bulk!

But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage

The gentle Thetis, and anon behold

The strong-ribbed bark through liquid mountains cut,

Bounding between the two moist elements,

Like Perseus’ horse. Where’s then the saucy boat

Whose weak untimbered sides but even now

Corrivaled greatness? Either to harbor fled

Or made a toast for Neptune. Even so

Doth valor’s show and valor’s worth divide

In storms of Fortune. For in her ray and brightness

The herd hath more annoyance by the breese

Than by the tiger, but when the splitting wind

Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks,

And flies flee under shade, why, then the thing of courage,

As roused with rage, with rage doth sympathize,

And with an accent tuned in selfsame key

Retorts to chiding Fortune.

Most wisely hath Ulysses here discovered

The fever whereof all our power is sick.

And in the imitation of these twain,

Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns

With an imperial voice, many are infect:

Ajax is grown self-willed and bears his head

In such a rein, in full as proud a place

As broad Achilles; keeps his tent like him,

Makes factious feasts; rails on our state of war,

Bold as an oracle, and sets Thersites—

A slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint—

To match us in comparisons with dirt,

To weaken and discredit our exposure,

How rank soever rounded in with danger.

Let this be granted, and Achilles’ horse

Makes many Thetis’ sons.

Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man

When Hector’s grandsire sucked. He is old now,

But if there be not in our Grecian host

A noble man that hath one spark of fire

To answer for his love, tell him from me

I’ll hide my silver beard in a gold beaver

And in my vambrace put my withered brawns

And, meeting him, will tell him that my lady

Was fairer than his grandam and as chaste

As may be in the world. His youth in flood,

I’ll prove this troth with my three drops of blood.

What says Ulysses?

What is ’t?

Well, and how?

True. The purpose is perspicuous as substance

Whose grossness little characters sum up;

And, in the publication, make no strain

But that Achilles, were his brain as barren

As banks of Libya—though, Apollo knows,

’Tis dry enough—will, with great speed of judgment,

Ay, with celerity, find Hector’s purpose

Pointing on him.

Why, ’tis most meet. Who may you else oppose

That can from Hector bring his honor off

If not Achilles? Though ’t be a sportful combat,

Yet in the trial much opinion dwells,

For here the Trojans taste our dear’st repute

With their fin’st palate. And, trust to me, Ulysses,

Our imputation shall be oddly poised

In this vile action. For the success,

Although particular, shall give a scantling

Of good or bad unto the general;

And in such indexes, although small pricks

To their subsequent volumes, there is seen

The baby figure of the giant mass

Of things to come at large. It is supposed

He that meets Hector issues from our choice;

And choice, being mutual act of all our souls,

Makes merit her election and doth boil,

As ’twere from forth us all, a man distilled

Out of our virtues, who, miscarrying,

What heart receives from hence a conquering part

To steel a strong opinion to themselves?—

Which entertained, limbs are his instruments,

In no less working than are swords and bows

Directive by the limbs.

I see them not with my old eyes. What are they?

Now, Ulysses, I begin to relish thy advice,

And I will give a taste thereof forthwith

To Agamemnon. Go we to him straight.

Two curs shall tame each other; pride alone

Must tar the mastiffs on, as ’twere a bone.

What moves Ajax thus to bay at him?

Who, Thersites?

Then will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost his

argument.

All the better. Their fraction is more our wish

than their faction. But it was a strong composure a

fool could disunite.

No Achilles with him.

And yet he loves himself. Is ’t not strange?

O, this is well; he rubs the vein of him.

How he describes himself!

An ’twould, you’d carry half.

He’s not yet through warm. Force him

with praises. Pour in, pour in; his ambition is dry.

Our noble general, do not do so.

Wherefore should you so?

He is not emulous, as Achilles is.

What a vice were it in Ajax now—

Ay, my good son.

Would you, my lord, aught with the General?

Nothing, my lord.

Our general doth salute you with a kiss.

And very courtly counsel. I’ll begin.

So much for Nestor.

A woman of quick sense.

The Trojan’s trumpet.

Now, Ajax, hold thine own!

I have, thou gallant Trojan, seen thee oft,

Laboring for destiny, make cruel way

Through ranks of Greekish youth; and I have seen thee,

As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed,

Despising many forfeits and subduments,

When thou hast hung thy advanced sword i’ th’ air,

Not letting it decline on the declined,

That I have said to some my standers-by

“Lo, Jupiter is yonder, dealing life!”

And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath

When that a ring of Greeks have hemmed thee in,

Like an Olympian wrestling. This have I seen.

But this thy countenance, still locked in steel,

I never saw till now. I knew thy grandsire

And once fought with him; he was a soldier good,

But, by great Mars, the captain of us all,

Never like thee! O, let an old man embrace thee;

And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents.

I would my arms could match thee in contention

As they contend with thee in courtesy.

Ha! By this white beard, I’d fight with thee tomorrow.

Well, welcome, welcome. I have seen the time!

Go, bear Patroclus’ body to Achilles,

And bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame.

There is a thousand Hectors in the field.

Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,

And here lacks work; anon he’s there afoot

And there they fly or die, like scalèd schools

Before the belching whale; then is he yonder,

And there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge,

Fall down before him like a mower’s swath.

Here, there, and everywhere he leaves and takes,

Dexterity so obeying appetite

That what he will he does, and does so much

That proof is called impossibility.

So, so, we draw together.

Peace, drums!

