


Agamemnon—how if he had boils, full, all

over, generally?

And those boils did run? Say so. Did not the

general run, then? Were not that a botchy core?

Then there would come some matter

from him. I see none now.

The plague of Greece upon thee, thou mongrel

beef-witted lord!

I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness,

but I think thy horse will sooner con an oration

than thou learn a prayer without book. Thou canst

strike, canst thou? A red murrain o’ thy jade’s tricks.

Dost thou think I have no sense, thou strikest

me thus?

Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think.

I would thou didst itch from head to foot,

and I had the scratching of thee; I would make

thee the loathsomest scab in Greece. When thou

art forth in the incursions, thou strikest as slow as

another.

Thou grumblest and railest every hour on

Achilles, and thou art as full of envy at his greatness

as Cerberus is at Proserpina’s beauty, ay, that

thou bark’st at him.

Thou shouldst strike him—

He would pound thee into shivers with his

fist as a sailor breaks a biscuit.

Do, do.

Ay, do, do, thou sodden-witted lord. Thou

hast no more brain than I have in mine elbows; an

asinego may tutor thee, thou scurvy-valiant ass.

Thou art here but to thrash Trojans, and thou art

bought and sold among those of any wit, like a

barbarian slave. If thou use to beat me, I will begin

at thy heel and tell what thou art by inches, thou

thing of no bowels, thou.

You scurvy lord!

Mars his idiot! Do, rudeness, do, camel, do,

do.

You see him there, do you?

Nay, look upon him.

Nay, but regard him well.

But yet you look not well upon him, for

whosomever you take him to be, he is Ajax.

Ay, but that fool knows not himself.

Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters!

His evasions have ears thus long. I have

bobbed his brain more than he has beat my bones.

I will buy nine sparrows for a penny, and his pia

mater is not worth the ninth part of a sparrow.

This lord, Achilles—Ajax, who wears his wit in his

belly, and his guts in his head—I’ll tell you what I

say of him.

I say, this Ajax—

Has not so much wit—

As will stop the eye of Helen’s needle, for

whom he comes to fight.

I would have peace and quietness, but the

fool will not—he there, that he. Look you there.

No, I warrant you. The fool’s will shame it.

I serve thee not.

I serve here voluntary.

E’en so. A great deal of your wit, too, lies in

your sinews, or else there be liars. Hector shall

have a great catch an he knock out either of

your brains; he were as good crack a fusty nut with

no kernel.

There’s Ulysses and old Nestor—whose wit

was moldy ere your grandsires had nails on

their toes—yoke you like draft-oxen and make

you plow up the wars.

Yes, good sooth. To, Achilles! To, Ajax! To—

’Tis no matter. I shall speak as much as

thou afterwards.

I will hold my peace when Achilles’ brach

bids me, shall I?

I will see you hanged like clodpolls ere I

come any more to your tents. I will keep where

there is wit stirring and leave the faction of fools.

How now, Thersites? What, lost in the

labyrinth of thy fury? Shall the elephant Ajax carry

it thus? He beats me, and I rail at him. O, worthy

satisfaction! Would it were otherwise, that I could

beat him whilst he railed at me. ’Sfoot, I’ll learn to

conjure and raise devils but I’ll see some issue of

my spiteful execrations. Then there’s Achilles, a

rare enginer! If Troy be not taken till these two undermine

it, the walls will stand till they fall of

themselves. O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus,

forget that thou art Jove, the king of gods;

and, Mercury, lose all the serpentine craft of thy

caduceus, if you take not that little, little, less than

little wit from them that they have, which short-armed

ignorance itself knows is so abundant

scarce it will not in circumvention deliver a fly

from a spider without drawing their massy irons

and cutting the web. After this, the vengeance on

the whole camp! Or rather, the Neapolitan bone-ache!

For that, methinks, is the curse depending

on those that war for a placket. I have said my

prayers, and devil Envy say “Amen.”—What ho,

my lord Achilles!

If I could ’a remembered a gilt counterfeit,

thou couldst not have slipped out of my contemplation.

But it is no matter. Thyself upon thyself! The

common curse of mankind, folly and ignorance,

be thine in great revenue! Heaven bless thee from

a tutor, and discipline come not near thee! Let thy

blood be thy direction till thy death; then if she

that lays thee out says thou art a fair corse, I’ll be

sworn and sworn upon ’t she never shrouded any

but lazars. Amen.

Where’s Achilles?

Ay. The heavens hear me!

Thy commander, Achilles.—Then, tell me,

Patroclus, what’s Achilles?

Thy knower, Patroclus. Then, tell me, Patroclus,

what art thou?

I’ll decline the whole question. Agamemnon

commands Achilles, Achilles is my lord, I am

Patroclus’ knower, and Patroclus is a fool.

Peace, fool. I have not done.

Agamemnon is a fool, Achilles is a fool,

Thersites is a fool, and, as aforesaid, Patroclus is a

fool.

Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command

Achilles, Achilles is a fool to be commanded of

Agamemnon, Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool,

and this Patroclus is a fool positive.

Make that demand of the creator. It suffices

me thou art.

Look you, who comes here?

Here is such patchery, such juggling, and

such knavery. All the argument is a whore and a

cuckold, a good quarrel to draw emulous factions

and bleed to death upon. Now the dry serpigo on

the subject, and war and lechery confound all!

A wonder!

Ajax goes up and down the field, asking for

himself.

He must fight singly tomorrow with Hector

and is so prophetically proud of an heroical cudgeling

that he raves in saying nothing.

Why, he stalks up and down like a peacock—

a stride and a stand; ruminates like an hostess

that hath no arithmetic but her brain to set

down her reckoning; bites his lip with a politic regard,

as who should say “There were wit in this

head an ’twould out”—and so there is, but it lies

as coldly in him as fire in a flint, which will not

show without knocking. The man’s undone forever,

for if Hector break not his neck i’ th’ combat,

he’ll break ’t himself in vainglory. He knows not

me. I said “Good morrow, Ajax,” and he replies

“Thanks, Agamemnon.” What think you of this

man that takes me for the General? He’s grown a

very land-fish, languageless, a monster. A plague of

opinion! A man may wear it on both sides, like a

leather jerkin.

Who, I? Why, he’ll answer nobody. He professes

not answering; speaking is for beggars; he

wears his tongue in ’s arms. I will put on his presence.

Let Patroclus make his demands to me. You

shall see the pageant of Ajax.

Hum!

Ha?

Hum!

Agamemnon?

Ha!

God b’ wi’ you, with all my heart.

If tomorrow be a fair day, by eleven of the

clock it will go one way or other. Howsoever, he

shall pay for me ere he has me.

Fare you well with all my heart.

No, but he’s out of tune thus. What music

will be in him when Hector has knocked out his

brains I know not. But I am sure none, unless the

fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make catlings on.

Let me bear another to his horse, for that’s

the more capable creature.

Would the fountain of your mind were clear

again, that I might water an ass at it. I had rather

be a tick in a sheep than such a valiant ignorance.

Why, thou picture of what thou seemest and

idol of idiot-worshippers, here’s a letter for thee.

Why, thou full dish of fool, from Troy.

The surgeon’s box or the patient’s wound.

Prithee, be silent, boy. I profit not by thy

talk. Thou art said to be Achilles’ male varlet.

Why, his masculine whore. Now the rotten

diseases of the south, the guts-griping, ruptures,

catarrhs, loads o’ gravel in the back, lethargies,

cold palsies, raw eyes, dirt-rotten livers, whissing

lungs, bladders full of impostume, sciaticas,

limekilns i’ th’ palm, incurable bone-ache, and the

rivelled fee-simple of the tetter, take and take

again such preposterous discoveries.

Do I curse thee?

No? Why art thou then exasperate, thou idle

immaterial skein of sleave-silk, thou green sarsenet

flap for a sore eye, thou tassel of a prodigal’s purse,

thou? Ah, how the poor world is pestered with such

waterflies, diminutives of nature!

Finch egg!

With too much blood and too little brain,

these two may run mad; but if with too much brain

and too little blood they do, I’ll be a curer of madmen.

Here’s Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough

and one that loves quails, but he has not so much

brain as earwax. And the goodly transformation

of Jupiter there, his brother, the bull—the primitive

statue and oblique memorial of cuckolds, a

thrifty shoeing-horn in a chain, hanging at his

brother’s leg—to what form but that he is should

wit larded with malice and malice forced with

wit turn him to? To an ass were nothing; he is both

ass and ox. To an ox were nothing; he is both ox

and ass. To be a dog, a mule, a cat, a fitchew, a

toad, a lizard, an owl, a puttock, or a herring without

a roe, I would not care; but to be Menelaus! I

would conspire against destiny. Ask me not what I

would be, if I were not Thersites, for I care not to be

the louse of a lazar so I were not Menelaus.

Heyday! Sprites and fires!

Sweet draught. “Sweet,” quoth he?

Sweet sink, sweet sewer.

That same Diomed’s a false-hearted rogue,

a most unjust knave. I will no more trust him when

he leers than I will a serpent when he hisses. He

will spend his mouth and promise like Brabbler

the hound, but when he performs, astronomers

foretell it; it is prodigious, there will come some

change. The sun borrows of the moon when

Diomed keeps his word. I will rather leave to see

Hector than not to dog him. They say he keeps a

Trojan drab and uses the traitor Calchas his tent.

I’ll after. Nothing but lechery! All incontinent varlets!

And any man may sing her, if he

can take her clef. She’s noted.

Roguery!

A juggling trick: to be secretly open!

How the devil Luxury, with his fat

rump and potato finger, tickles these together.

Fry, lechery, fry!

Now the pledge, now, now, now!

Now she sharpens. Well said,

whetstone.

A proof of strength she could not publish more,

Unless she said “My mind is now turned whore.”

Will he swagger himself out on ’s

own eyes?

He’ll tickle it for his concupy.

Would I could meet that rogue Diomed! I

would croak like a raven; I would bode, I would

bode. Patroclus will give me anything for the intelligence

of this whore. The parrot will not do more

for an almond than he for a commodious drab.

Lechery, lechery, still wars and lechery! Nothing

else holds fashion. A burning devil take them!

Now they are clapper-clawing one another.

I’ll go look on. That dissembling abominable varlet,

Diomed, has got that same scurvy doting foolish

young knave’s sleeve of Troy there in his helm.

I would fain see them meet, that that same young

Trojan ass that loves the whore there might send

that Greekish whoremasterly villain with the sleeve

back to the dissembling luxurious drab, of a sleeveless

errand. O’ th’ t’other side, the policy of those

crafty swearing rascals—that stale old mouse-eaten

dry cheese, Nestor, and that same dog-fox,

Ulysses—is proved not worth a blackberry. They

set me up, in policy, that mongrel cur, Ajax, against

that dog of as bad a kind, Achilles. And now is the

cur Ajax prouder than the cur Achilles, and will

not arm today, whereupon the Grecians begin to

proclaim barbarism, and policy grows into an ill

opinion.

Soft! Here comes sleeve and t’ other.

Hold thy whore, Grecian! Now for thy

whore, Trojan! Now the sleeve, now the sleeve!

No, no, I am a rascal, a scurvy railing

knave, a very filthy rogue.

God-a-mercy, that thou wilt believe me!

But a plague break thy neck for frighting me!

What’s become of the wenching rogues? I think

they have swallowed one another. I would laugh at

that miracle—yet, in a sort, lechery eats itself. I’ll

seek them.

The cuckold and the cuckold-maker are at

it. Now, bull! Now, dog! Loo, Paris, loo! Now, my

double-horned Spartan! Loo, Paris, loo! The bull

has the game. Ware horns, ho!

What art thou?

I am a bastard too. I love bastards. I am

bastard begot, bastard instructed, bastard in mind,

bastard in valor, in everything illegitimate. One

bear will not bite another, and wherefore should

one bastard? Take heed: the quarrel’s most ominous

to us. If the son of a whore fight for a whore,

he tempts judgment. Farewell, bastard.

