


And how his silence drinks up this applause!

You must prepare to fight without Achilles.

Or covetous of praise—

Or strange, or self-affected—

Be ruled by him, Lord Ajax.

This shall I undertake, and ’tis a burden

Which I am proud to bear.

That’s my mind too.—Good morrow, Lord Aeneas.

The one and other Diomed embraces.

Our bloods are now in calm, and, so long, health;

But when contention and occasion meet,

By Jove, I’ll play the hunter for thy life

With all my force, pursuit, and policy.

We sympathize. Jove, let Aeneas live,

If to my sword his fate be not the glory,

A thousand complete courses of the sun!

But in mine emulous honor let him die

With every joint a wound and that tomorrow.

We do, and long to know each other worse.

Both alike.

He merits well to have her that doth seek her,

Not making any scruple of her soilure,

With such a hell of pain and world of charge;

And you as well to keep her that defend her,

Not palating the taste of her dishonor,

With such a costly loss of wealth and friends.

He, like a puling cuckold, would drink up

The lees and dregs of a flat tamèd piece;

You, like a lecher, out of whorish loins

Are pleased to breed out your inheritors.

Both merits poised, each weighs nor less nor more;

But he as he, the heavier for a whore.

She’s bitter to her country. Hear me, Paris:

For every false drop in her bawdy veins

A Grecian’s life hath sunk; for every scruple

Of her contaminated carrion weight

A Trojan hath been slain. Since she could speak,

She hath not given so many good words breath

As for her Greeks and Trojans suffered death.

Fair Lady Cressid,

So please you, save the thanks this prince expects.

The luster in your eye, heaven in your cheek,

Pleads your fair usage, and to Diomed

You shall be mistress and command him wholly.

O, be not moved, Prince Troilus.

Let me be privileged by my place and message

To be a speaker free. When I am hence,

I’ll answer to my lust, and know you, lord,

I’ll nothing do on charge. To her own worth

She shall be prized; but that you say “Be ’t so,”

I speak it in my spirit and honor: “no.”

Even she.

Lady, a word. I’ll bring you to your father.

You must no more.

As Hector pleases.

’Tis Agamemnon’s wish; and great Achilles

Doth long to see unarmed the valiant Hector.

I cannot, lord. I have important business,

The tide whereof is now.—Good night, great Hector.

What, are you up here, ho? Speak.

Diomed. Calchas, I think? Where’s your

daughter?

How now, my charge?

Will you remember?

Nay, but do, then, and let your mind be

coupled with your words.

Nay, then—

Foh, foh, come, tell a pin! You are forsworn.

What did you swear you would bestow on me?

Good night.

No, no, good night. I’ll be your fool no more.

And so good night.

Foh foh! Adieu. You palter.

But will you, then?

Give me some token for the surety of it.

Whose was ’t?

I shall have it.

Ay, that.

Nay, do not snatch it from me.

I had your heart before. This follows it.

I will have this. Whose was it?

Come, tell me whose it was.

Whose was it?

Tomorrow will I wear it on my helm

And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.

Why, then, farewell.

Thou never shalt mock Diomed again.

I do not like this fooling.

What, shall I come? The hour?

Farewell, till then.

Thou dost miscall retire.

I do not fly, but advantageous care

Withdrew me from the odds of multitude.

Have at thee!

Go, go, my servant, take thou Troilus’ horse;

Present the fair steed to my Lady Cressid.

Fellow, commend my service to her beauty.

Tell her I have chastised the amorous Trojan

And am her knight by proof.

Ay, there, there!

Troilus, I say! Where’s Troilus?

I would correct him.

Ha! Art thou there?

He is my prize. I will not look upon.

The bruit is Hector’s slain, and by Achilles.

