


How now, Prince Troilus? Wherefore not afield?

That Paris is returnèd home, and hurt.

Troilus, by Menelaus.

Hark what good sport is out of town today!

In all swift haste.

Is this great Agamemnon’s tent, I pray you?

May one that is a herald and a prince

Do a fair message to his kingly eyes?

Fair leave and large security. How may

A stranger to those most imperial looks

Know them from eyes of other mortals?

Ay. I ask that I might waken reverence

And bid the cheek be ready with a blush

Modest as morning when she coldly eyes

The youthful Phoebus.

Which is that god in office, guiding men?

Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?

Courtiers as free, as debonair, unarmed,

As bending angels—that’s their fame in peace.

But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,

Good arms, strong joints, true swords, and—great Jove’s accord—

Nothing so full of heart. But peace, Aeneas.

Peace, Trojan. Lay thy finger on thy lips.

The worthiness of praise distains his worth

If that the praised himself bring the praise forth.

But what the repining enemy commends,

That breath fame blows; that praise, sole pure, transcends.

Ay, Greek, that is my name.

Sir, pardon. ’Tis for Agamemnon’s ears.

Nor I from Troy come not to whisper with him.

I bring a trumpet to awake his ear,

To set his sense on the attentive bent,

And then to speak.

Trumpet, blow loud!

Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents;

And every Greek of mettle, let him know

What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud.

We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy

A prince called Hector—Priam is his father—

Who in this dull and long-continued truce

Is resty grown. He bade me take a trumpet

And to this purpose speak: “Kings, princes, lords,

If there be one among the fair’st of Greece

That holds his honor higher than his ease,

That seeks his praise more than he fears his peril,

That knows his valor and knows not his fear,

That loves his mistress more than in confession

With truant vows to her own lips he loves

And dare avow her beauty and her worth

In other arms than hers—to him this challenge.

Hector, in view of Trojans and of Greeks,

Shall make it good, or do his best to do it,

He hath a lady wiser, fairer, truer

Than ever Greek did couple in his arms

And will tomorrow with his trumpet call,

Midway between your tents and walls of Troy,

To rouse a Grecian that is true in love.

If any come, Hector shall honor him;

If none, he’ll say in Troy when he retires

The Grecian dames are sunburnt and not worth

The splinter of a lance.” Even so much.

Now heavens forfend such scarcity of youth!

Is the Prince there in person?—

Had I so good occasion to lie long

As you, Prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business

Should rob my bedmate of my company.

Health to you, valiant sir,

During all question of the gentle truce;

But when I meet you armed, as black defiance

As heart can think or courage execute.

And thou shalt hunt a lion that will fly

With his face backward. In human gentleness,

Welcome to Troy. Now, by Anchises’ life,

Welcome indeed. By Venus’ hand I swear

No man alive can love in such a sort

The thing he means to kill more excellently.

We know each other well.

I was sent for to the King, but why I know not.

That I assure you.

Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece

Than Cressid borne from Troy.

Good morrow, all.

Good morrow, lord, good morrow.

Is not Prince Troilus here?

Come, he is here, my lord. Do not deny him.

It doth import him much to speak with me.

Ho, nay, then! Come, come, you’ll do him

wrong ere you are ware. You’ll be so true to him to

be false to him. Do not you know of him, but yet go

fetch him hither. Go.

My lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,

My matter is so rash. There is at hand

Paris your brother and Deiphobus,

The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor

Delivered to us; and for him forthwith,

Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,

We must give up to Diomedes’ hand

The Lady Cressida.

By Priam and the general state of Troy.

They are at hand and ready to effect it.

Good, good, my lord; the secrets of nature

Have not more gift in taciturnity.

My lord, is the lady ready?

Nay, good my lord—

How have we spent this morning!

The Prince must think me tardy and remiss

That swore to ride before him to the field.

Yea, with a bridegroom’s fresh alacrity

Let us address to tend on Hector’s heels.

The glory of our Troy doth this day lie

On his fair worth and single chivalry.

Hail, all the state of Greece! What shall be done

To him that victory commands? Or do you purpose

A victor shall be known? Will you the knights

Shall to the edge of all extremity

Pursue each other, or shall they be divided

By any voice or order of the field?

Hector bade ask.

He cares not; he’ll obey conditions.

If not Achilles, sir,

What is your name?

Therefore Achilles. But whate’er, know this:

In the extremity of great and little,

Valor and pride excel themselves in Hector,

The one almost as infinite as all,

The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well,

And that which looks like pride is courtesy.

This Ajax is half made of Hector’s blood,

In love whereof half Hector stays at home;

Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek

This blended knight, half Trojan and half Greek.

Princes, enough, so please you.

There is expectance here from both the sides

What further you will do.

The noble Menelaus.

’Tis the old Nestor.

I have been seeking you this hour, my lord.

Hector, by this, is arming him in Troy.

Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home.

Stand, ho! Yet are we masters of the field.

Never go home; here starve we out the night.

Hector! The gods forbid!

My lord, you do discomfort all the host.

