


Princes, what grief hath set the jaundice o’er your cheeks?

The ample proposition that hope makes

In all designs begun on Earth below

Fails in the promised largeness. Checks and disasters

Grow in the veins of actions highest reared,

As knots, by the conflux of meeting sap,

Infects the sound pine and diverts his grain

Tortive and errant from his course of growth.

Nor, princes, is it matter new to us

That we come short of our suppose so far

That after seven years’ siege yet Troy walls stand,

Sith every action that hath gone before,

Whereof we have record, trial did draw

Bias and thwart, not answering the aim

And that unbodied figure of the thought

That gave ’t surmisèd shape. Why then, you princes,

Do you with cheeks abashed behold our works

And call them shames, which are indeed naught else

But the protractive trials of great Jove

To find persistive constancy in men?

The fineness of which metal is not found

In Fortune’s love; for then the bold and coward,

The wise and fool, the artist and unread,

The hard and soft seem all affined and kin.

But in the wind and tempest of her frown,

Distinction, with a broad and powerful fan,

Puffing at all, winnows the light away,

And what hath mass or matter by itself

Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.

Speak, Prince of Ithaca, and be ’t of less expect

That matter needless, of importless burden,

Divide thy lips than we are confident

When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws

We shall hear music, wit, and oracle.

The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses,

What is the remedy?

What trumpet? Look, Menelaus.

What would you ’fore our tent?

Even this.

With surety stronger than Achilles’ arm

’Fore all the Greekish host, which with one voice

Call Agamemnon head and general.

How?

This Trojan scorns us, or the men of Troy

Are ceremonious courtiers.

Sir, you of Troy, call you yourself Aeneas?

What’s your affair, I pray you?

He hears naught privately that comes from Troy.

Speak frankly as the wind;

It is not Agamemnon’s sleeping hour.

That thou shalt know, Trojan, he is awake,

He tells thee so himself.

This shall be told our lovers, Lord Aeneas.

If none of them have soul in such a kind,

We left them all at home. But we are soldiers,

And may that soldier a mere recreant prove

That means not, hath not, or is not in love!

If then one is, or hath, or means to be,

That one meets Hector. If none else, I am he.

Fair Lord Aeneas, let me touch your hand.

To our pavilion shall I lead you, sir.

Achilles shall have word of this intent;

So shall each lord of Greece from tent to tent.

Yourself shall feast with us before you go,

And find the welcome of a noble foe.

Where is Achilles?

Let it be known to him that we are here.

He shent our messengers, and we lay by

Our appertainments, visiting of him.

Let him be told so, lest perchance he think

We dare not move the question of our place

Or know not what we are.

Hear you, Patroclus:

We are too well acquainted with these answers,

But his evasion, winged thus swift with scorn,

Cannot outfly our apprehensions.

Much attribute he hath, and much the reason

Why we ascribe it to him. Yet all his virtues,

Not virtuously on his own part beheld,

Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss,

Yea, and like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish,

Are like to rot untasted. Go and tell him

We come to speak with him; and you shall not sin

If you do say we think him overproud

And underhonest, in self-assumption greater

Than in the note of judgment; and worthier than himself

Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on,

Disguise the holy strength of their command,

And underwrite in an observing kind

His humorous predominance—yea, watch

His course and time, his ebbs and flows, as if

The passage and whole carriage of this action

Rode on his tide. Go tell him this, and add

That, if he overhold his price so much,

We’ll none of him. But let him, like an engine

Not portable, lie under this report:

“Bring action hither; this cannot go to war.”

A stirring dwarf we do allowance give

Before a sleeping giant. Tell him so.

In second voice we’ll not be satisfied;

We come to speak with him.—Ulysses, enter you.

No more than what he thinks he is.

No question.

No, noble Ajax. You are as strong, as

valiant, as wise, no less noble, much more gentle,

and altogether more tractable.

Your mind is the clearer, Ajax, and your

virtues the fairer. He that is proud eats up himself.

Pride is his own glass, his own trumpet, his own

chronicle; and whatever praises itself but in the

deed devours the deed in the praise.

What’s his excuse?

Why, will he not, upon our fair request,

Untent his person and share th’ air with us?

Let Ajax go to him.—

Dear lord, go you and greet him in his tent.

’Tis said he holds you well and will be led

At your request a little from himself.

O, no, you shall not go.

He will be the physician that

should be the patient.

Go we to council. Let Achilles sleep.

Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw deep.

What wouldst thou of us, Trojan, make demand?

Let Diomedes bear him,

And bring us Cressid hither. Calchas shall have

What he requests of us. Good Diomed,

Furnish you fairly for this interchange.

Withal, bring word if Hector will tomorrow

Be answered in his challenge. Ajax is ready.

We’ll execute your purpose and put on

A form of strangeness as we pass along;

So do each lord, and either greet him not

Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more

Than if not looked on. I will lead the way.

What says Achilles? Would he aught with us?

The better.

Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,

Anticipating time with starting courage.

Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy,

Thou dreadful Ajax, that the appallèd air

May pierce the head of the great combatant

And hale him hither.

Is not yond Diomed with Calchas’ daughter?

Is this the Lady Cressid?

Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady.

The Trojan’s trumpet.

Yonder comes the troop.

Which way would Hector have it?

’Tis done like Hector.

Here is Sir Diomed.—Go, gentle knight;

Stand by our Ajax. As you and Lord Aeneas

Consent upon the order of their fight,

So be it, either to the uttermost

Or else a breath. The combatants being kin

Half stints their strife before their strokes begin.

What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy?

They are in action.

His blows are well disposed.—There, Ajax!

Worthy all arms! As welcome as to one

That would be rid of such an enemy—

But that’s no welcome. Understand more clear:

What’s past and what’s to come is strewed with husks

And formless ruin of oblivion;

But in this extant moment, faith and troth,

Strained purely from all hollow bias-drawing,

Bids thee, with most divine integrity,

From heart of very heart, great Hector, welcome.

My well-famed lord of Troy, no less to you.

First, all you peers of Greece, go to my tent;

There in the full convive we. Afterwards,

As Hector’s leisure and your bounties shall

Concur together, severally entreat him.

Beat loud the taborins; let the trumpets blow,

That this great soldier may his welcome know.

We go wrong, we go wrong.

So now, fair prince of Troy, I bid good night.

Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.

Good night.

Renew, renew! The fierce Polydamas

Hath beat down Menon; bastard Margareton

Hath Doreus prisoner,

And stands colossus-wise, waving his beam

Upon the pashèd corses of the kings

Epistrophus and Cedius. Polyxenes is slain,

Amphimachus and Thoas deadly hurt,

Patroclus ta’en or slain, and Palamedes

Sore hurt and bruised. The dreadful Sagittary

Appals our numbers. Haste we, Diomed,

To reinforcement, or we perish all.

Hark, hark, what shout is this?

March patiently along. Let one be sent

To pray Achilles see us at our tent.

If in his death the gods have us befriended,

Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.

