


Mistress Page! Trust me, I was going to

your house.

Nay, I’ll ne’er believe that. I have to

show to the contrary.

Well, I do, then. Yet I say I could show

you to the contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some

counsel.

O woman, if it were not for one trifling

respect, I could come to such honor!

If I would but go to hell for an eternal

moment or so, I could be knighted.

We burn daylight. Here, read, read. Perceive

how I might be knighted.

I shall think the

worse of fat men as long as I have an eye to make

difference of men’s liking. And yet he would not

swear; praised women’s modesty; and gave such

orderly and well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness

that I would have sworn his disposition

would have gone to the truth of his words. But

they do no more adhere and keep place together

than the Hundredth Psalm to the tune of

Greensleeves. What tempest, I trow, threw this

whale, with so many tuns of oil in his belly, ashore

at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I

think the best way were to entertain him with hope

till the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his

own grease. Did you ever hear the like?

Why, this is the very same—the very

hand, the very words. What doth he think of us?

“Boarding” call you it? I’ll be sure to

keep him above deck.

Nay, I will consent to act any villainy

against him that may not sully the chariness of our

honesty. O, that my husband saw this letter! It

would give eternal food to his jealousy.

You are the happier woman.

How now, sweet Frank? Why

art thou melancholy?

Faith, thou hast some crochets in thy

head now.—Will you go, Mistress Page?

Trust me, I thought on her. She’ll fit it.

What, John! What, Robert!

I warrant.—What, Robert, I say!

Here, set it down.

Marry, as I told you before, John and

Robert, be ready here hard by in the brewhouse,

and when I suddenly call you, come forth, and

without any pause or staggering take this basket

on your shoulders. That done, trudge with it in all

haste, and carry it among the whitsters in Datchet

Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch close

by the Thames side.

I ha’ told them over and over. They lack

no direction.—Be gone, and come when you are

called.

How now, my eyas-musket? What news

with you?

Do so.—Go tell thy master I am alone.

Mistress Page, remember you your

cue.

Go to, then. We’ll use this unwholesome

humidity, this gross-wat’ry pumpion. We’ll

teach him to know turtles from jays.

O, sweet Sir John!

I your lady, Sir John? Alas, I should be

a pitiful lady.

A plain kerchief, Sir John. My brows

become nothing else, nor that well neither.

Believe me, there’s no such thing in

me.

Do not betray me, sir. I fear you love

Mistress Page.

Well, heaven knows how I love you,

and you shall one day find it.

Nay, I must tell you, so you do, or else

I could not be in that mind.

Pray you, do so. She’s a very tattling

woman.

What’s the matter? How now?

What’s the matter, good Mistress Page?

What cause of suspicion?

Why, alas, what’s the matter?

’Tis not so, I hope.

What shall I do? There is a gentleman,

my dear friend; and I fear not mine own shame so

much as his peril. I had rather than a thousand

pound he were out of the house.

He’s too big to go in there. What shall I

do?

What, John! Robert! John!

Go, take up these clothes here quickly. Where’s the

cowlstaff? Look how you drumble! Carry them to

the laundress in Datchet Mead. Quickly! Come.

Why, what have you to do whither they

bear it? You were best meddle with buck-washing!

I know not which pleases me better—

that my husband is deceived, or Sir John.

I am half afraid he will have need of

washing, so throwing him into the water will do

him a benefit.

I think my husband hath some special

suspicion of Falstaff’s being here, for I never saw

him so gross in his jealousy till now.

Shall we send that foolish carrion Mistress

Quickly to him, and excuse his throwing into

the water, and give him another hope, to betray

him to another punishment?

You use me well, Master Ford, do you?

Heaven make you better than your

thoughts!

He’s a-birding, sweet Sir John.

Step into th’ chamber, Sir John.

Why, none but mine own people.

No, certainly. Speak

louder.

Why?

Why, does he talk of him?

How near is he, Mistress Page?

I am undone! The knight is here.

Which way should he go? How should

I bestow him? Shall I put him into the basket

again?

There they always use to discharge

their birding pieces.

He will seek there, on my word. Neither

press, coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he

hath an abstract for the remembrance of such

places, and goes to them by his note. There is no

hiding you in the house.

How might we disguise him?

My maid’s aunt, the fat woman of

Brentford, has a gown above.

Go, go, sweet Sir John. Mistress Page

and I will look some linen for your head.

I would my husband would meet him

in this shape. He cannot abide the old woman of

Brentford. He swears she’s a witch, forbade her my

house, and hath threatened to beat her.

But is my husband coming?

We’ll try that; for I’ll appoint my men

to carry the basket again, to meet him at the door

with it as they did last time.

I’ll first direct my men what they shall

do with the basket. Go up. I’ll bring linen for him

straight.

Go, sirs, take the basket again on your

shoulders. Your master is hard at door. If he bid

you set it down, obey him. Quickly, dispatch.

Heaven be my witness you do, if you

suspect me in any dishonesty.

Are you not ashamed? Let the clothes

alone.

Why, man, why?

If you find a man there, he shall die a

flea’s death.

What ho, Mistress

Page! Come you and the old woman down. My

husband will come into the chamber.

Why, it is my maid’s aunt of Brentford.

Nay, good sweet husband!—Good gentlemen,

let him not strike the old woman.

Nay, he will do it.—’Tis a goodly credit

for you.

Nay, by th’ Mass, that he did not; he

beat him most unpitifully, methought.

What think you? May we, with the

warrant of womanhood and the witness of a good

conscience, pursue him with any further revenge?

Shall we tell our husbands how we

have served him?

I’ll warrant they’ll have him publicly

shamed, and methinks there would be no period to

the jest should he not be publicly shamed.

Devise but how you’ll use him when he comes,

And let us two devise to bring him thither.

Marry, this is our device,

That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.

Where is Nan now, and her troop of

fairies, and the Welsh devil Hugh?

That cannot choose but amaze him.

We’ll betray him finely.

The hour draws on. To the oak, to the

oak!

Sir John? Art thou there, my deer, my

male deer?

Mistress Page is come with me,

sweetheart.

Heaven forgive our sins!

Away, away.

Sir John, we have had ill luck. We

could never meet. I will never take you for my love

again, but I will always count you my deer.

