


How now, Mephostophilus?

He hears with ears.

Ha, thou mountain foreigner!—Sir John and

master mine, I combat challenge of this latten

bilbo.—Word of denial in thy labras here! Word of

denial! Froth and scum, thou liest.

O base Hungarian wight, wilt thou the spigot

wield?

“Convey,” the wise it call. “Steal”? Foh, a fico

for the phrase!

Why, then, let kibes ensue.

Young ravens must have food.

I ken the wight. He is of substance good.

Two yards and more.

He hath studied her will and

translated her will—out of honesty into English.

As many devils entertain, and

“To her, boy,” say I.

Then did the sun on dunghill

shine.

Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,

And by my side wear steel? Then Lucifer take all!

Let vultures gripe thy guts! For gourd and fullam holds,

And high and low beguiles the rich and poor.

Tester I’ll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,

Base Phrygian Turk!

Wilt thou revenge?

With wit or steel?

And I to Page shall eke unfold

How Falstaff, varlet vile,

His dove will prove, his gold will hold,

And his soft couch defile.

Thou art the Mars of malcontents. I second

thee. Troop on.

Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.

Sir John affects thy wife.

He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,

Both young and old, one with another, Ford.

He loves the gallimaufry. Ford, perpend.

With liver burning hot. Prevent,

Or go thou like Sir Acteon, he,

With Ringwood at thy heels.

O, odious is the name!

The horn, I say. Farewell.

Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night.

Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo birds do sing.—

Away, Sir Corporal Nym.—Believe it, Page. He

speaks sense.

Why then, the world’s mine oyster, which I

with sword will open.

Didst not thou share? Hadst thou not fifteen

pence?

I do relent. What would thou more of man?

This punk is one of Cupid’s carriers.

Clap on more sails, pursue; up with your fights;

Give fire! She is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!

Elves, list your names. Silence, you airy toys!—

Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap,

Where fires thou find’st unraked and hearths unswept.

There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry.

Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.

Vile worm, thou wast o’erlooked even in thy birth.

A trial, come!

Fie on sinful fantasy!

Fie on lust and luxury!

Lust is but a bloody fire

Kindled with unchaste desire,

Fed in heart whose flames aspire

As thoughts do blow them higher and higher.

Pinch him, fairies, mutually;

Pinch him for his villainy.

Pinch him and burn him and turn him about,

Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.

