


Who’s there?

I am glad to see your Worships well. I thank you

for my venison, Master Shallow.

Sir, I thank you.

I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.

It could not be judged, sir.

A cur, sir.

Sir, he is within, and I would I could do a good

office between you.

Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.

Here comes Sir John.

We three to hear it and end it between them.

Nay, daughter, carry the wine in. We’ll drink

within.

How now, Mistress Ford?

Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome.—Come, we

have a hot venison pasty to dinner. Come, gentlemen,

I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.

Come, gentle Master Slender, come. We stay for

you.

By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! Come,

come.

Come on, sir.

“The humor of it,” quoth he? Here’s a fellow

frights English out of his wits.

I never heard such a drawling, affecting

rogue.

I will not believe such a Cataian, though

the priest o’ th’ town commended him for a true

man.

How now, Meg?

How now, Master Ford?

Yes, and you heard what the other told me?

Hang ’em, slaves! I do not think the knight

would offer it. But these that accuse him in his intent

towards our wives are a yoke of his discarded

men, very rogues, now they be out of service.

Marry, were they.

Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage

toward my wife, I would turn her loose to him;

and what he gets more of her than sharp words, let

it lie on my head.

Look where my ranting Host of the Garter

comes. There is either liquor in his pate or money

in his purse when he looks so merrily.—How now,

mine Host?

I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill

in his rapier.

Have with you. I had rather hear them scold

than fight.

Now, good Master Doctor!

Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great

fighter, though now a man of peace.

’Tis true, Master Shallow.

Sir Hugh is there, is he?

Adieu, good Master

Doctor.

God save you, good Sir Hugh!

And youthful still—in your doublet and hose

this raw rheumatic day?

We are come to you to do a good office, Master

Parson.

Yonder is a most reverend gentleman who, belike

having received wrong by some person, is at

most odds with his own gravity and patience that

ever you saw.

I think you know him: Master Doctor Caius, the

renowned French physician.

Why?

I warrant you, he’s the man should

fight with him.

Nay, good Master Parson, keep in your weapon.

Well met, Master Ford.

You have, Master Slender. I stand wholly for

you.—But my wife, Master Doctor, is for you

altogether.

Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman

is of no having. He kept company with the

wild Prince and Poins. He is of too high a region;

he knows too much. No, he shall not knit a knot in

his fortunes with the finger of my substance. If he

take her, let him take her simply. The wealth I have

waits on my consent, and my consent goes not that

way.

Have with you to

see this monster.

Good Master Ford, be contented. You wrong

yourself too much.

Nay, follow him, gentlemen. See the issue of his

search.

Fie, fie, Master Ford, are you not ashamed?

What spirit, what devil suggests this imagination?

I would not ha’ your distemper in this kind for the

wealth of Windsor Castle.

Let’s go in, gentlemen.

But, trust me, we’ll mock him.

I do invite you tomorrow morning

to my house to breakfast. After, we’ll a-birding together;

I have a fine hawk for the bush. Shall it be

so?

Now, Master Slender.—Love him, daughter Anne.—

Why, how now? What does Master Fenton here?

You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.

I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.

She is no match for you.

No, good Master Fenton.—

Come Master Shallow.—Come, son Slender, in.—

Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.

Why, this passes, Master Ford! You are not to go

loose any longer; you must be pinioned.

This passes.

Here’s no man.

No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.

Let’s obey his humor a little further. Come,

gentlemen.

And did he send you both these letters at an

instant?

’Tis well, ’tis well. No more.

Be not as extreme in submission as in offense.

But let our plot go forward. Let our wives

Yet once again, to make us public sport,

Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,

Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.

How, to send him word they’ll meet him in the

park at midnight? Fie, fie, he’ll never come.

So think I too.

Why, yet there want not many that do fear

In deep of night to walk by this Herne’s oak.

But what of this?

Well, let it not be doubted but he’ll come.

And in this shape when you have brought him thither,

What shall be done with him? What is your plot?

That silk will I go buy. And in that time

Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away

And marry her at Eton.—Go, send to Falstaff straight.

Come, come. We’ll couch i’ th’ castle ditch till we

see the light of our fairies.—Remember, son Slender,

my—

The night is dark. Light and spirits will become

it well. Heaven prosper our sport! No man means

evil but the devil, and we shall know him by his

horns. Let’s away. Follow me.

Nay, do not fly. I think we have watched you now.

Will none but Herne the Hunter serve your turn?

Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable entrails?

And as poor as Job?

Yet be cheerful, knight. Thou shalt eat a posset

tonight at my house, where I will desire thee to

laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee. Tell her

Master Slender hath married her daughter.

Son, how now! How now, son! Have you

dispatched?

Of what, son?

Upon my life, then, you took the wrong—

Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you

how you should know my daughter by her

garments?

My heart misgives me. Here comes Master Fenton.—

How now, Master Fenton!

Now, mistress, how chance you went not with

Master Slender?

Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy.

What cannot be eschewed must be embraced.

