


Now, Master Shallow, you’ll complain of me

to the King?

But not kissed your keeper’s daughter.

I will answer it straight: I have done all this.

That is now answered.

’Twere better for you if it were known in

counsel. You’ll be laughed at.

Good worts? Good cabbage!—Slender, I

broke your head. What matter have you against

me?

Pistol.

Pistol, did you pick Master Slender’s purse?

Is this true, Pistol?

What say you, Scarlet and John?

You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen.

You hear it.

Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well

met. By your leave, good mistress.

Mine Host of the Garter!

Truly, mine Host, I must turn away some of

my followers.

I sit at ten pounds a week.

Do so, good mine Host.

Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good

trade. An old cloak makes a new jerkin, a withered

servingman a fresh tapster. Go. Adieu.

I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox.

His thefts were too open. His filching was like an

unskillful singer; he kept not time.

Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.

There is no remedy. I must cony-catch, I

must shift.

Which of you know Ford of this town?

My honest lads, I will tell you what I am

about.

No quips now, Pistol. Indeed, I am in the

waist two yards about, but I am now about no

waste; I am about thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make

love to Ford’s wife. I spy entertainment in her. She

discourses; she carves; she gives the leer of invitation.

I can construe the action of her familiar style;

and the hardest voice of her behavior, to be Englished

rightly, is “I am Sir John Falstaff’s.”

Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of

her husband’s purse. He hath a legion of angels.

I have writ me here a

letter to her; and here another to Page’s wife, who

even now gave me good eyes too, examined my

parts with most judicious oeillades. Sometimes

the beam of her view gilded my foot, sometimes

my portly belly.

O, she did so course o’er my exteriors with

such a greedy intention that the appetite of her

eye did seem to scorch me up like a burning-glass.

Here’s another letter to her. She bears the purse

too; she is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty.

I will be cheaters to them both, and they shall be

exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West

Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go bear thou

this letter to Mistress Page—and thou this to Mistress

Ford. We will thrive, lads, we will thrive.

Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly;

Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.—

Rogues, hence, avaunt, vanish like hailstones, go,

Trudge, plod away i’ th’ hoof, seek shelter, pack!

Falstaff will learn the humor of the age:

French thrift, you rogues—myself and skirted page.

I will not lend thee a penny.

Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you

should lay my countenance to pawn. I have grated

upon my good friends for three reprieves for you

and your coach-fellow Nym, or else you had

looked through the grate like a gemini of baboons.

I am damned in hell for swearing to gentlemen my

friends you were good soldiers and tall fellows.

And when Mistress Bridget lost the handle of her

fan, I took ’t upon mine honor thou hadst it not.

Reason, you rogue, reason. Think’st thou I’ll

endanger my soul gratis? At a word, hang no more

about me. I am no gibbet for you. Go—a short

knife and a throng—to your manor of Pickt-hatch,

go. You’ll not bear a letter for me, you rogue? You

stand upon your honor? Why, thou unconfinable

baseness, it is as much as I can do to keep the

terms of my honor precise. Ay, ay, I myself sometimes,

leaving the fear of God on the left hand

and hiding mine honor in my necessity, am fain to

shuffle, to hedge, and to lurch; and yet you, rogue,

will ensconce your rags, your cat-a-mountain

looks, your red-lattice phrases, and your bold beating

oaths under the shelter of your honor! You will

not do it? You?

Let her approach.

Good morrow, goodwife.

Good maid, then.

I do believe the swearer. What with me?

Two thousand, fair woman, and I’ll vouchsafe

thee the hearing.

Well, on. “Mistress Ford,” you say—

I warrant thee, nobody hears. Mine own

people, mine own people.

Well, “Mistress Ford”—what of her?

“Mistress Ford”—come, “Mistress Ford”—

But what says she to me? Be brief, my good

she-Mercury.

Ten and eleven?

Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to

her. I will not fail her.

Not I, I assure thee. Setting the attraction of

my good parts aside, I have no other charms.

But I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford’s wife

and Page’s wife acquainted each other how they

love me?

Why, I will.

Fare thee well. Commend me to them both.

There’s my purse. I am yet

thy debtor.—Boy, go along with this woman.

This news distracts

me.

Sayst thou so, old Jack? Go thy ways. I’ll

make more of thy old body than I have done. Will

they yet look after thee? Wilt thou, after the expense

of so much money, be now a gainer? Good

body, I thank thee. Let them say ’tis grossly done;

so it be fairly done, no matter.

Brook is his name?

Call him in. Such Brooks are welcome to

me that o’erflows such liquor.

Ah ha, Mistress Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompassed

you? Go to. Via!

And you, sir. Would you speak with me?

You’re welcome. What’s your will?—Give us

leave, drawer.

Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance

of you.

Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.

Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your

porter.

Speak, good Master Brook. I shall be glad

to be your servant.

Very well, sir. Proceed.

Well, sir.

Have you received no promise of satisfaction

at her hands?

Have you importuned her to such a

purpose?

Of what quality was your love, then?

To what purpose have you unfolded this to

me?

O, sir!

Would it apply well to the vehemency of

your affection that I should win what you would

enjoy? Methinks you prescribe to yourself very

preposterously.

Master Brook, I will first

make bold with your money; next, give me your

hand; and, last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if

you will, enjoy Ford’s wife.

I say you shall.

Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you

shall want none. I shall be with her, I may tell you,

by her own appointment. Even as you came in to

me, her assistant or go-between parted from me. I

say I shall be with her between ten and eleven, for

at that time the jealous, rascally knave her husband

will be forth. Come you to me at night. You

shall know how I speed.

Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know

him not. Yet I wrong him to call him poor. They

say the jealous wittolly knave hath masses of

money, for the which his wife seems to me well-favored.

I will use her as the key of the cuckoldly

rogue’s coffer, and there’s my harvest home.

Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I

will stare him out of his wits. I will awe him with

my cudgel; it shall hang like a meteor o’er the

cuckold’s horns. Master Brook, thou shalt know I

will predominate over the peasant, and thou shalt

lie with his wife. Come to me soon at night. Ford’s

a knave, and I will aggravate his style. Thou, Master

Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold.

Come to me soon at night.

“Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel?”

Why, now let me die, for I have lived long enough.

This is the period of my ambition. O, this blessèd

hour!

Mistress Ford, I cannot cog. I cannot prate,

Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish: I would

thy husband were dead. I’ll speak it before the best

lord: I would make thee my lady.

Let the court of France show me such

another. I see how thine eye would emulate the

diamond. Thou hast the right arched beauty of the

brow that becomes the ship-tire, the tire-valiant,

or any tire of Venetian admittance.

Thou art a tyrant to say so. Thou wouldst

make an absolute courtier, and the firm fixture of

thy foot would give an excellent motion to thy gait

in a semicircled farthingale. I see what thou wert,

if Fortune thy foe were not, Nature thy friend.

Come, thou canst not hide it.

What made me love thee? Let that persuade

thee. There’s something extraordinary in thee.

Come, I cannot cog and say thou art this and that

like a many of these lisping hawthorn buds that

come like women in men’s apparel and smell like

Bucklersbury in simple time. I cannot. But I love

thee, none but thee; and thou deserv’st it.

Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by

the Counter gate, which is as hateful to me as the

reek of a lime-kiln.

Keep in that mind. I’ll deserve it.

She shall not see me. I will ensconce me behind

the arras.

Let me see ’t, let me see ’t! O, let me see ’t! I’ll

in, I’ll in. Follow your friend’s counsel. I’ll in.

I love thee. Help me

away. Let me creep in here. I’ll never—

Bardolph, I say!

Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in ’t.

Have I lived to be carried in a basket like a barrow

of butcher’s offal, and to be thrown in the Thames?

Well, if I be served such another trick, I’ll have my

brains ta’en out and buttered, and give them to a

dog for a New Year’s gift. ’Sblood, the rogues

slighted me into the river with as little remorse as

they would have drowned a blind bitch’s puppies,

fifteen i’ th’ litter! And you may know by my size

that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom

were as deep as hell, I should down. I had

been drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and

shallow—a death that I abhor, for the water swells

a man, and what a thing should I have been when

I had been swelled! By the Lord, I should have

been a mountain of mummy.

Come, let me pour in some sack to the

Thames water, for my belly’s as cold as if I had

swallowed snowballs for pills to cool the reins.

Call her in.

Take away these chalices. Go

brew me a pottle of sack finely.

Simple of itself. I’ll no pullet sperm in my

brewage.

How now?

Mistress Ford? I have had ford enough. I

was thrown into the ford, I have my belly full of

ford.

So did I mine, to build upon a foolish

woman’s promise.

Well, I will visit her. Tell her so. And bid her

think what a man is. Let her consider his frailty,

and then judge of my merit.

Do so. Between nine and ten, say’st thou?

Well, be gone. I will not miss her.

I marvel I hear not of Master Brook. He

sent me word to stay within. I like his money well.

O, here he comes.

Now, Master Brook, you come to know

what hath passed between me and Ford’s wife.

Master Brook, I will not lie to you. I was at

her house the hour she appointed me.

Very ill-favoredly, Master Brook.

No, Master Brook, but the peaking cornuto

her husband, Master Brook, dwelling in a continual

’larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant of

our encounter, after we had embraced, kissed,

protested, and, as it were, spoke the prologue of

our comedy, and, at his heels, a rabble of his companions,

thither provoked and instigated by his

distemper, and, forsooth, to search his house for

his wife’s love.

While I was there.

You shall hear. As good luck would have it,

comes in one Mistress Page, gives intelligence of

Ford’s approach, and, in her invention and Ford’s

wife’s distraction, they conveyed me into a

buck-basket.

By the Lord, a buck-basket! Rammed me

in with foul shirts and smocks, socks, foul stockings,

greasy napkins, that, Master Brook, there

was the rankest compound of villainous smell that

ever offended nostril.

Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I

have suffered to bring this woman to evil for your

good. Being thus crammed in the basket, a couple

of Ford’s knaves, his hinds, were called forth by

their mistress to carry me in the name of foul

clothes to Datchet Lane. They took me on their

shoulders, met the jealous knave their master in

the door, who asked them once or twice what they

had in their basket. I quaked for fear lest the lunatic

knave would have searched it, but fate, ordaining

he should be a cuckold, held his hand.

Well, on went he for a search, and away went I for

foul clothes. But mark the sequel, Master Brook.

I suffered the pangs of three several deaths: first,

an intolerable fright to be detected with a jealous

rotten bellwether; next, to be compassed, like a

good bilbo, in the circumference of a peck, hilt to

point, heel to head; and then, to be stopped in, like

a strong distillation, with stinking clothes that fretted

in their own grease. Think of that, a man of my

kidney—think of that—that am as subject to heat

as butter; a man of continual dissolution and thaw.

It was a miracle to ’scape suffocation. And in

the height of this bath, when I was more than half-stewed

in grease, like a Dutch dish, to be thrown

into the Thames and cooled, glowing hot, in that

surge, like a horseshoe! Think of that—hissing

hot—think of that, Master Brook.

Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna,

as I have been into Thames, ere I will leave her

thus. Her husband is this morning gone a-birding.

I have received from her another embassy of meeting.

’Twixt eight and nine is the hour, Master

Brook.

Is it? I will then address me to my appointment.

Come to me at your convenient leisure,

and you shall know how I speed; and the conclusion

shall be crowned with your enjoying her.

Adieu. You shall have her, Master Brook. Master

Brook, you shall cuckold Ford.

Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up

my sufferance. I see you are obsequious in your

love, and I profess requital to a hair’s breadth, not

only, Mistress Ford, in the simple office of love,

but in all the accoutrement, compliment, and ceremony

of it. But are you sure of your husband now?

No, I’ll come no more i’ th’ basket. May I not

go out ere he come?

What shall I do? I’ll creep up into the

chimney.

Where is it?

I’ll go out, then.

Good hearts, devise something. Any extremity

rather than a mischief.

How now, mine Host?

There was, mine Host, an old fat woman

even now with me, but she’s gone.

Ay, marry, was it, mussel-shell. What would

you with her?

I spake with the old woman about it.

Marry, she says that the very same man that

beguiled Master Slender of his chain cozened him

of it.

What are they? Let us know.

’Tis; ’tis his fortune.

To have her or no. Go. Say the woman told

me so.

Ay, sir; like who more bold.

Ay, that there was, mine Host, one that hath

taught me more wit than ever I learned before in

my life. And I paid nothing for it neither, but was

paid for my learning.

I would all the world might be cozened, for I

have been cozened and beaten too. If it should

come to the ear of the court how I have been transformed,

and how my transformation hath been

washed and cudgeled, they would melt me out of

my fat drop by drop, and liquor fishermen’s boots

with me. I warrant they would whip me with their

fine wits till I were as crestfallen as a dried pear. I

never prospered since I forswore myself at

primero. Well, if my wind were but long enough, I

would repent.

Now, whence come you?

The devil take one party, and his dam the

other, and so they shall be both bestowed. I have

suffered more for their sakes, more than the villainous

inconstancy of man’s disposition is able to

bear.

What tell’st thou me of black and blue? I was

beaten myself into all the colors of the rainbow,

and I was like to be apprehended for the witch of

Brentford. But that my admirable dexterity of wit,

my counterfeiting the action of an old woman, delivered

me, the knave constable had set me i’ th’

stocks, i’ th’ common stocks, for a witch.

Come up into my chamber.

Prithee, no more prattling. Go. I’ll hold. This

is the third time; I hope good luck lies in odd numbers.

Away, go. They say there is divinity in odd

numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death.

Away.

Away, I say! Time wears. Hold up your head,

and mince.

How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the

matter will be known tonight or never. Be you in

the park about midnight, at Herne’s oak, and you

shall see wonders.

I went to her, Master Brook, as you see,

like a poor old man, but I came from her, Master

Brook, like a poor old woman. That same knave

Ford, her husband, hath the finest mad devil of

jealousy in him, Master Brook, that ever governed

frenzy. I will tell you, he beat me grievously,

in the shape of a woman; for in the shape of man,

Master Brook, I fear not Goliath with a weaver’s

beam, because I know also life is a shuttle. I am in

haste. Go along with me; I’ll tell you all, Master

Brook. Since I plucked geese, played truant, and

whipped top, I knew not what ’twas to be beaten

till lately. Follow me. I’ll tell you strange things of

this knave Ford, on whom tonight I will be revenged,

and I will deliver his wife into your hand.

Follow. Strange things in hand, Master Brook!

Follow.

The Windsor bell hath struck twelve. The

minute draws on. Now, the hot-blooded gods assist

me! Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy

Europa; love set on thy horns. O powerful love,

that in some respects makes a beast a man, in

some other a man a beast! You were also, Jupiter,

a swan for the love of Leda. O omnipotent love,

how near the god drew to the complexion of a

goose! A fault done first in the form of a beast; O

Jove, a beastly fault! And then another fault in the

semblance of a fowl; think on ’t, Jove, a foul fault.

When gods have hot backs, what shall poor men

do? For me, I am here a Windsor stag, and the fattest,

I think, i’ th’ forest. Send me a cool rut-time,

Jove, or who can blame me to piss my tallow?

Who comes here? My doe?

My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain

potatoes, let it thunder to the tune of “Greensleeves,”

hail kissing-comfits, and snow eryngoes; let there

come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me

here.

Divide me like a bribed buck, each a haunch.

I will keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for

the fellow of this walk, and my horns I bequeath

your husbands. Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like

Herne the Hunter? Why, now is Cupid a child of

conscience; he makes restitution. As I am a true

spirit, welcome.

What should this be?

I think the devil will not have me damned,

lest the oil that’s in me should set hell on fire. He

would never else cross me thus.

They are fairies. He that speaks to them shall die.

I’ll wink and couch. No man their works must eye.

Heavens defend me from that Welsh

fairy, lest he transform me to a piece of cheese.

O, O, O!

I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.

And these are not fairies. I was three or four

times in the thought they were not fairies; and yet

the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of

my powers, drove the grossness of the foppery into

a received belief, in despite of the teeth of all

rhyme and reason, that they were fairies. See now

how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent when ’tis upon

ill employment.

Have I laid my brain in the sun and dried it,

that it wants matter to prevent so gross o’erreaching

as this? Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too?

Shall I have a coxcomb of frieze? ’Tis time I were

choked with a piece of toasted cheese.

“Seese” and “putter”? Have I lived to stand at

the taunt of one that makes fritters of English?

This is enough to be the decay of lust and late

walking through the realm.

Well, I am your theme. You have the start of

me. I am dejected. I am not able to answer the

Welsh flannel. Ignorance itself is a plummet o’er

me. Use me as you will.

I am glad, though you have ta’en a special

stand to strike at me, that your arrow hath

glanced.

When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.

