


What says my bullyrook? Speak scholarly and

wisely.

Discard, bully Hercules, cashier. Let them wag;

trot, trot.

Thou ’rt an emperor—Caesar, Keiser, and

Pheazar. I will entertain Bardolph. He shall draw,

he shall tap. Said I well, bully Hector?

I have spoke. Let him follow.—Let me see thee

froth and lime. I am at a word. Follow.

How now, bullyrook? Thou ’rt a gentleman.—

Cavaleiro Justice, I say!

Tell him, Cavaleiro Justice; tell him, bullyrook.

What say’st thou, my bullyrook?

Hast thou no suit against my knight,

my guest cavalier?

My hand, bully. Thou shalt have egress and

regress—said I well?—and thy name shall be

Brook. It is a merry knight.

Will you go, ameers?

Here, boys, here, here! Shall we wag?

God bless thee, bully doctor!

To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse;

to see thee here, to see thee there; to see

thy pass, thy puncto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy

distance, thy montant. Is he dead, my Ethiopian?

Is he dead, my Francisco? Ha, bully? What says

my Aesculapius, my Galien, my heart of elder, ha?

Is he dead, bully stale? Is he dead?

Thou art a Castalion King Urinal Hector of

Greece, my boy!

Pardon, guest Justice. A word,

Monsieur Mockwater.

“Mockwater,” in our English tongue, is “valor,”

bully.

He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.

That is, he will make thee amends.

And I will provoke him to ’t, or let him wag.

And moreover, bully—

But first, Master guest, and

Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go you

through the town to Frogmore.

He is there. See what humor he is in; and I will

bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do

well?

Let him die. Sheathe thy impatience; throw cold

water on thy choler. Go about the fields with me

through Frogmore. I will bring thee where Mistress

Anne Page is, at a farmhouse a-feasting, and

thou shalt woo her. Cried game! Said I well?

For the which I will be thy adversary toward

Anne Page. Said I well?

Let us wag, then.

Disarm them, and let them question. Let them

keep their limbs whole and hack our English.

Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,

soul-curer and body-curer!

Peace, I say! Hear mine Host of the Garter. Am

I politic? Am I subtle? Am I a Machiavel? Shall I

lose my doctor? No, he gives me the potions and

the motions. Shall I lose my parson, my priest, my

Sir Hugh? No, he gives me the proverbs and the

no-verbs. Give me thy hand, terrestrial;

so. Give me thy hand, celestial;

so. Boys of art, I have deceived you both. I

have directed you to wrong places. Your hearts are

mighty, your skins are whole, and let burnt sack be

the issue. Come, lay their

swords to pawn. Follow

me, lads of peace, follow, follow, follow.

What say you to young Master Fenton?

He capers, he dances, he has eyes of youth, he

writes verses, he speaks holiday, he smells April

and May. He will carry ’t, he will carry ’t. ’Tis in his

buttons he will carry ’t.

Farewell, my hearts. I will to my honest knight

Falstaff, and drink canary with him.

What duke should that be comes so secretly? I

hear not of him in the court. Let me speak with the

gentlemen. They speak English?

They shall have my horses, but I’ll make them

pay. I’ll sauce them. They have had my house a

week at command; I have turned away my other

guests. They must come off. I’ll sauce them. Come.

What wouldst thou have, boor? What, thickskin?

Speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick,

snap.

There’s his chamber, his house, his castle, his

standing-bed and truckle-bed. ’Tis painted about

with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go,

knock and call. He’ll speak like an Anthropophaginian

unto thee. Knock, I say.

Ha? A fat woman? The knight may be robbed.

I’ll call.—Bully knight! Bully Sir John! Speak from

thy lungs military. Art thou there? It is thine Host,

thine Ephesian, calls.

Here’s a Bohemian Tartar tarries the coming

down of thy fat woman. Let her descend, bully, let

her descend. My chambers are honorable. Fie! Privacy?

Fie!

Ay, come. Quick!

Conceal them, or thou diest.

Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was

there a wise woman with thee?

Where be my horses? Speak well of them,

varletto.

They are gone but to meet the Duke, villain. Do

not say they be fled. Germans are honest men.

What is the matter, sir?

Here, Master Doctor, in perplexity and doubtful

dilemma.

Hue and cry, villain, go!—Assist

me, knight. I am undone.—Fly, run; hue and cry,

villain! I am undone.

Master Fenton, talk not to me. My mind is

heavy. I will give over all.

I will hear you, Master Fenton, and I will, at the

least, keep your counsel.

Which means she to deceive, father or mother?

Well, husband your device. I’ll to the vicar.

Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.

