


Hilloa, loa!

I have seen two such sights, by sea

and by land—but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is

now the sky; betwixt the firmament and it, you

cannot thrust a bodkin’s point.

I would you did but see how it chafes,

how it rages, how it takes up the shore. But that’s

not to the point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor

souls! Sometimes to see ’em, and not to see ’em.

Now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast,

and anon swallowed with yeast and froth, as you’d

thrust a cork into a hogshead. And then for the land

service, to see how the bear tore out his shoulder-bone,

how he cried to me for help, and said his

name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an

end of the ship: to see how the sea flap-dragoned it.

But, first, how the poor souls roared and the sea

mocked them, and how the poor gentleman roared

and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than

the sea or weather.

Now, now. I have not winked since I

saw these sights. The men are not yet cold under

water, nor the bear half dined on the gentleman.

He’s at it now.

I would you had been by the ship side,

to have helped her. There your charity would have

lacked footing.

You’re a made old

man. If the sins of your youth are forgiven you,

you’re well to live. Gold, all gold.

Go you the next way with your

findings. I’ll go see if the bear be gone from the

gentleman and how much he hath eaten. They are

never curst but when they are hungry. If there be

any of him left, I’ll bury it.

Marry, will I, and you shall help to

put him i’ th’ ground.

Let me see, every ’leven wether tods,

every tod yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen

hundred shorn, what comes the wool to?

I cannot do ’t without counters. Let

me see, what am I to buy for our sheep-shearing

feast? Three pound of sugar,

five pound of currants, rice—what will this sister of

mine do with rice? But my father hath made her

mistress of the feast, and she lays it on. She hath

made me four-and-twenty nosegays for the shearers,

three-man song men all, and very good ones;

but they are most of them means and basses, but

one Puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to

hornpipes. I must have saffron to color the warden

pies; mace; dates, none, that’s out of my note;

nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I

may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of

raisins o’ th’ sun.

I’ th’ name of me!

Alack, poor soul, thou hast need of

more rags to lay on thee rather than have these off.

Alas, poor man, a million of beating

may come to a great matter.

What, by a horseman, or a footman?

Indeed, he should be a footman by

the garments he has left with thee. If this be a

horseman’s coat, it hath seen very hot service. Lend

me thy hand; I’ll help thee. Come, lend me thy

hand.

Alas, poor soul.

How now? Canst stand?

Dost lack any money? I have a little

money for thee.

What manner of fellow was he that

robbed you?

His vices, you would say. There’s no

virtue whipped out of the court. They cherish it to

make it stay there, and yet it will no more but abide.

Out upon him! Prig, for my life, prig!

He haunts wakes, fairs, and bearbaitings.

Not a more cowardly rogue in all

Bohemia. If you had but looked big and spit at him,

he’d have run.

How do you now?

Shall I bring thee on the way?

Then fare thee well. I must go buy

spices for our sheep-shearing.

Come on, strike up.

Not a word, a word. We stand upon our manners.—

Come, strike up.

He could never come better. He shall

come in. I love a ballad but even too well if it be

doleful matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant

thing indeed and sung lamentably.

Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable

conceited fellow. Has he any unbraided

wares?

Prithee bring him in, and let him

approach singing.

You have of these peddlers that have

more in them than you’d think, sister.

If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou

shouldst take no money of me; but being enthralled

as I am, it will also be the bondage of certain

ribbons and gloves.

Is there no manners left among

maids? Will they wear their plackets where they

should bear their faces? Is there not milking time,

when you are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle

of these secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling

before all our guests? ’Tis well they are whisp’ring.

Clamor your tongues, and not a word more.

Have I not told thee how I was cozened

by the way and lost all my money?

Fear not thou, man. Thou shalt lose

nothing here.

What hast here? Ballads?

Come on, lay it by, and

let’s first see more ballads. We’ll buy the other

things anon.

Lay it by too. Another.

We’ll have this song out anon by

ourselves. My father and the gentlemen are in sad

talk, and we’ll not trouble them. Come, bring away

thy pack after me.—Wenches, I’ll buy for you

both.—Peddler, let’s have the first choice.—Follow

me, girls.

See, see, what a man

you are now! There is no other way but to tell the

King she’s a changeling and none of your flesh and

blood.

Nay, but hear me!

She being none of your flesh and

blood, your flesh and blood has not offended the

King, and so your flesh and blood is not to be

punished by him. Show those things you found

about her, those secret things, all but what she has

with her. This being done, let the law go whistle, I

warrant you.

Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest

off you could have been to him, and then your

blood had been the dearer by I know how much an

ounce.

Pray heartily he be at’ palace.

We are but plain fellows, sir.

Your Worship had like to have given

us one, if you had not taken yourself with the

manner.

’s the

court word for a pheasant. Say you have none.

This cannot be but a

great courtier.

He seems to be the more noble in

being fantastical. A great man, I’ll warrant. I know

by the picking on ’s teeth.

Think you so, sir?

Has the old man e’er a son, sir, do you

hear, an ’t like you, sir?

He seems to be of

great authority. Close with him, give him gold; and

though authority be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft

led by the nose with gold. Show the inside of your

purse to the outside of his hand, and no more ado.

Remember: “stoned,” and “flayed alive.”

In some sort, sir; but though my case

be a pitiful one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.

Comfort, good comfort.

We must to the King, and show our strange

sights. He must know ’tis none of your daughter nor

my sister. We are gone else.—Sir, I will give you as

much as this old man does when the business is

performed, and remain, as he says, your pawn till it

be brought you.

We are blessed in this

man, as I may say, even blessed.

You are well met, sir.

You denied to fight with me this other day because I

was no gentleman born. See you these clothes? Say

you see them not and think me still no gentleman

born. You were best say these robes are not gentlemen

born. Give me the lie, do, and try whether I am

not now a gentleman born.

Ay, and have been so any time these

four hours.

So you have—but I was a gentleman

born before my father. For the King’s son took me

by the hand and called me brother, and then the

two kings called my father brother, and then the

Prince my brother and the Princess my sister called

my father father; and so we wept, and there was the

first gentlemanlike tears that ever we shed.

Ay, or else ’twere hard luck, being in

so preposterous estate as we are.

Thou wilt amend thy

life?

Give me thy hand. I will swear to the

Prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is in

Bohemia.

Not swear it, now I am a gentleman?

Let boors and franklins say it; I’ll swear it.

If it be ne’er so false, a true gentleman

may swear it in the behalf of his friend.—And

I’ll swear to the Prince thou art a tall fellow of thy

hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know

thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou

wilt be drunk. But I’ll swear it, and I would thou

wouldst be a tall fellow of thy hands.

Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow. If

I do not wonder how thou dar’st venture to be

drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark,

the Kings and Princes, our kindred, are going to see

the Queen’s picture. Come, follow us. We’ll be thy

good masters.

